SPEAKER_05:
Hello, Complexity Weekend, November 2021.

I'm Daniel, and I'm here with Sean.

Sean, how goes it?


SPEAKER_07:
It goes well.

Yeah, we had a lot of fun late into my time zone.

Got some sleep, refreshed, ready to rock today.

We're going to do a lot of really cool team dynamics today.

It's a lot of it's going to kick off today, so I'm excited about it.


SPEAKER_05:
Awesome.

So we're going to hear some 25 minutes of cybernetic tunes by Michael Garfield.

And we'll be back in 25 minutes with a middle live stream talking about the team process and try to get some teams going and give visibility to the ones that have formed.

So thank you, Sean, and everybody for participating.

See you in 25 minutes.


SPEAKER_03:
Woo!


UNKNOWN:
Thank you.

Wow.

Thank you.

Music Music Music

Bye.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_06:
so so


SPEAKER_05:
Okay.

Hello, everyone.

Welcome back.

Hey, Blue and Sean, would you like to just say hello while things are getting set up?


SPEAKER_02:
Good morning.

Hope everybody had a great first day at Complexity Weekend and are ready to take on day two, the bathtub.

The saddle.


SPEAKER_07:
Yep.

Blue, what was your experience so far this weekend?

How's it been?


SPEAKER_02:
It's been really great, actually.

I've attended more, like, live facilitator sessions.

I don't always get to do that.

I always get, like, sucked into conversations.

And I was like, I'm going to just go to sessions.

And so, like, I dragged myself and, like, forced myself to break away.

I think having the alternating office hours, too.

It's like you had a whole hour to talk to me.

Now I'm going to go listen to someone else talk.

So that's been helpful and I've enjoyed the sessions that I've attended so far.


SPEAKER_07:
our unstructured time office hours.

It's given me also a lot more ability to actually attend the live sessions.

And the live sessions are transitioning a lot easier.

Like some, you know, the live session ends and everyone just wants to keep talking, you know, and there's nothing necessarily to jump right into after.

So that's really, really nice.

And I think I've even seen some team scenes kind of form.

People have really great interaction in the live session and they just continue it over into the office hour unstructured time.

We got everyone together.

It's really cool.


SPEAKER_05:
it's like a little fractal linger because when you hang out after the facilitated session, then in that space, there's time for connections and for teams.

And then in a way, the entire November 12th or 14th weekend, that's like our facilitated session as a cohort.

And then that two, that one hour of the weekend will end.

And then it's the next hour, it's Monday or it's next weekend.

so it's perfect for this middle live stream so for people who are watching live feel free to write any comments or ideas or questions in the live chat otherwise if you're watching replay awesome and thanks for catching up so this middle live stream

Yay, welcome Park.

Hang out with us while we go through this first part and just anyone who raises their hand and gather will hear from.

We're going to do two parts to this middle live stream.

The first part is going to be some slides and discussion on the team process at Complexity Weekend.

And then the second part is going to be the Jamboard.

Pull out the same Jamboard that we've used.

There's some new slides and maybe some people have added some other comments.

And then we'll talk through some of the more team-oriented slides.

And I'll just mute you, Park.

Okay, so onto the slides.

So team process.

So I'll just give the overview, but yeah, we'll use the raise hand here in the live stream.

And also we have a lot of time to talk through these slides on Teams.

First, we're gonna give an overview of the team process and talk about some of the frequently asked questions that participants have.

We'll talk about some modes of team formation during the weekend, like the synchronous and asynchronous opportunities, as well as the modes of finding a team that's already out there and starting a team.

We'll look over the team registration form.

We could actually just scan through the actual form live just so that people feel familiar with it, understand why different questions are being asked and see opportunities for giving feedback for what kinds of questions could be asked because the team process, like all parts of Complexity Weekend, it's always getting feedback and iterating as we develop through the weekends.

Then we'll talk about modes of participation during the weekend as a team, including the team coworking spaces.

And then we'll talk about preparing you and your team for the closing live stream Sunday and beyond.

Okay.

Why form teams?

So there's three points here, which I'll just recap and then anyone else just feel free to add because that's one of the biggest questions is like, why aren't we just hanging out and listening to a podcast?

Or why aren't we just a community of shared interest or shared belief?

What is a community of practice and how is that different?

What does it mean to be a community with teams in it?

First, we learn and apply complexity by doing.

And having diverse participation in teams helps complexity education.

Just the people who we bump into on the way to the grocery store will not be the total complexity perspective picture.

So having teams brings people together and that contributes to our complexity learning and application.

The second one is that complex problems often require diverse teams to have positive long lasting impact.

So sustained impact and improvement on the systems of interest might not be possible with a single disciplinary approach.

We can't just fine tune the miles per gallon of the engine and then think that the whole transit system will run more efficiently.

Greetings, Justin, welcome.

And then the third point before anyone can add more, because this is like a very, you know, central question about why do we form teams?

And the third one is that the community weekend, community of practice is relatively sparse temporarily because we do two cohort based weekends per year.

And then the other 10 months we have heartbeats.

So even if you attended

every single hour of facilitated sessions during a whole year of Complexity Weekend, total grand slam effort, it would amount to perhaps several days of participation.

And so how do we think about that as the scaffold for the work that we as individuals and relationships and teams do?

And how do we keep that ongoing momentum and alignment?

That's what this stream is going to be.

to a large extent about.

So anyone else, feel free to pop in.

Sean first, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, I think what would be really helpful right now in the lecture is maybe talking to Justin Park, who are both first-time facilitators, how your engagement's kind of gone, your interaction's gone,

this point it's really been a lot about being individuals and sense making and just what is complex what are these big questions learning through conversation and live session experiences and this is kind of where the weekend starts to tip into more of the learning by doing finding collaboration networks uh forming diverse teams and applying kind of applied complexities to problems together how have those interactions been going and and what kind of team early team dynamics have you maybe detected or just in our party that one of them both


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I think that, you know, the first day for me at least was like acclimation, you know, like just getting comfortable with like the whole thing, you know, just becoming more like, you know, just increasing my understanding of what Complexity Weekend really is and, you know, who the community members are, like getting to know them on an individual level.

you know, seeing what they're working on.

And, you know, I didn't really go in to the first day with the idea of, okay, now I have to find team members.

I think it was more of just like, let's go talk and see where things go.

And, you know, without really putting any...

any specific, you know, expectation around it.

Um, because yeah, I think that it's, it's important to be like kind of free flowing and, uh, allow this to be semi serendipitous.

Thanks Justin.


SPEAKER_05:
And Park, if you want to add anything.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah.

I mean, um, we immediately jumped into a second, um, sort of like the office hours sort of session just expanded from what it was that we were talking about.

Um,

I actually found what was really amazing is that it's actually quite an emotional event.

There are a lot of things that we talked about that were quite emotional.

And while we were still pursuing and thinking about complexity, I mean, my sessions about decision making on the internet and sort of thinking about the internet as a brain and

we, we, I mean, I think that was kind of, um, that's one of the big things that I got as a takeaway is that, um, because of the interdisciplinary nature of the work that we're doing, um, there's also an interdiscipline of, um, sensory inputs.

And some of that is, is also just emotion, um, which was surprising.

Um, and honestly is other information.

It's, it's valuable, um, because it's, it's part of what contributes to, um,

like a complex response in particular for the way that my group ended up thinking.

And the inputs were all very wonderful and from a lot of different angles.

And so I'm resonating with this idea of the diverse participation in teams because

There were a lot of, there was clear diversity in thinking.

You could even just see it in the backgrounds behind people in their video streams.

I mean, I'm thinking of you right now, Daniel, as well.

Like, your background's always quite artful.

But we had the same thing.

We had Jana.

I had Jana in my group and

she was sitting in front of her wall of chaos is what she called it.

It's like where she just puts all of her thinking.

And then I had Kevin and he, you know, had a very like Spartan room with like a single picture of, I'm going to be honest, I'm going to assume a philosopher on the wall.

And just sort of, you know, thinking about like where it is, the diversity of thinking comes from and how it's being contributed and,

Yeah, so I mean, I think that's kind of like how it's been so far.

It's just like getting a sense for the fact that as codified as the thinking can be, and maybe this is something that emerged from my discussion as well, as codified as the thinking can be, there are other sensory inputs that can go into producing the information from an event.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you, Park.

Blue, and then Sean.


SPEAKER_02:
So just to add, like to go back to the team idea or discussion complexity weekend itself takes a team of people to organize, to facilitate, to go to the heartbeat events.

And so, you know, if you don't end in a team, like we've got committees, we've got the wiki, we've got a lot of other like stuff going on.

So even the community of,

building CW is also a team.

So it takes teams to make anything happen that happens in the community.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks.

And Sean?


SPEAKER_07:
I mean, maybe I'm actually going to just ask.

I didn't see Blue's hand raised.

I'm going to ask Blue to actually chime in just because you've been a facilitator three times now.

So we've got kind of the first time facilitator experience.

And, you know, we're going to get into all the team formation dynamics over the next slides.

But, you know, what does it feel like that transition from, you know, sense making, like,

being individuals, you know, just forming kind of the cohort experience, you know, the first day to like teams are forming now, team seeds are starting to be there.

What is that like?


SPEAKER_02:
So I don't know, I relate like Complexity Weekend and the community at large, like to going to the gym.

I look at it like it's like the mental gym, right?

Like this is like the idea gym or like the brain gym.

Because when you first go, like you show up to a class and you don't really know what's going on and you just try to follow along and you're like, you know, trying to get the moves down.

Am I doing this right?

You're like worried about form.

And so there's all these like little

kind of peripheral, like subtle nuanced things, like how do you just gather?

Where's the space?

Where are my people?

Where am I supposed to be?

What are my affordances?

How do I use the equipment?

Like, it's like showing up to the gym and you need a trainer, right?

Like you need someone to follow while you're there.

And then, you know, as you keep like coming back and it's the same for the gym for me, it's like you go and the same people are there.

And then, you know, you, you make progress and you, you get better at doing what you're doing and then you gain some traction and some expertise.

And there's some things you're good at, some things you're not, and you see the same people.

Right.

So, so it's like you build up this like social expectation and then there's the expectation that you show up.

Like, you know, like Daniel, if you were not at CW, like one weekend, I'd be like, oh my God, where's Daniel?

Is he okay?

So there's the expectation.

the social expectation that we all see each other, that we all like continue to be here and continue to, you know, work on our own mental gymnastics.

So I don't know.

It's like you get into a groove, I think.

And all of the little things become like you already know how to do all the tricks, how to use gather, how to use key base.

Like you're operationally functional at all those levels.

And so now all that's left is actually the heavy lifting, so to say.


SPEAKER_05:
Great, well, let's continue through these slides.

So we talked a little bit about that early part.

Note how we don't have any times, because everyone's gonna be checking in and out as their availability and preferences and time zones work for them.

But we are squarely in the middle.

as Blue said, the bathtub part, just that flat part in between the bookends where we're continuing with our nonstop rhythm of even UTC hours having one or more facilitated sessions and odd UTC being facilitator office hours or just unstructured time to hang out.

And that's really been a fun change to our schedule.

This is really why we bring the team formation discussion to the middle livestream because there's so much

getting a grip in the beginning and making sure that the tools are working as you want them to be and meeting people so you know in the middle you can be out there wandering with all your tools tuned up and six cool people who you talk to so now you have the incipient crew the networking and start to connect across the cohort and this is our midpoint not

geometric midpoint but we're starting to think about looking back upon that early formation day and towards sunday and beyond so any comments on the overview otherwise we can continue all right yeah i mean i think you know we'll keep advancing the slides but the important thing is that today is all about identifying team seeds or creating team seeds yourself or finding when


SPEAKER_07:
that you might want to join into and form a team.

And then Sunday, the last day of the weekend is all about sharing about these teams.

This is just a blip in time this weekend.

There's no way you're going to really solve any of these major problems in this short amount of time, but what you can do is start that process.

And even if you collectively come together as a team and said, that says, you know, we're only going to have to be a team for this weekend because we just want to learn and we're going to do as much as we can to learn.

go back into the community and not resume each team.

That's totally fine.

There's so many different ways to organize yourselves.

And some teams, many often will decide to continue after the weekend at whatever rate's comfortable for everyone for whatever goals they may have.

But we'll get into it more in a minute.


SPEAKER_05:
Great.

So let's do a little bit of a, uh, dialogue structured, frequently asked questions.

So I'll just, um, I'll ask the question and then Sean, please, um, read the response and then anybody can give a comment on, uh, where they want it to unpack and answer or wanted a little more clarification or another question that we could ask.

So, um, can I start or join a team?


SPEAKER_07:
I mean,

It's a two-journ adventure weekend, right?

There's so many different participation modes.

The answer is clearly, yes, you can.

You can also choose not to join a team, right?

It's totally up to you.

Ultimately, it's your team, right?

So for the second question, it doesn't have to be just cohort people that are in the team, right?

People that are in our cohort.

The gathered space that we're in in the Keybase team are only for our cohort.

So people from outside the cohort cannot join that.

That doesn't mean you can't add people from outside of the cohort into your teams.


SPEAKER_05:
Do I have to join a team to be in Complexity Weekend Community of Practice?


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, and to the earlier point, you know, there's so many participation modes, right?

People may want to participate in the weekend only in Keybase and actually never even enter Gather or have a Seekerness interaction.

They may decide not to join teams at all.

It's really up to you and your own complexity journey.

And we would highly recommend joining a team from that first slide of why different teams, because it's a really effective way to learn complexity by doing, unpacking these very abstract concepts into a specific system with a diverse set of people in our cohort to learn that that is not required.


SPEAKER_05:
And a comment from Michaela, a facilitator in live chat, who wrote, I do not find it a necessity to join a team if your goal is to network and triage people to the right group.

So that's somewhat from a facilitator's perspective, but it just shows that, no, it's not a necessity.

So when do teams form?


SPEAKER_07:
Uli, do you want to take that one?


SPEAKER_02:
So teams form kind of spontaneously.

You know, you guys can nucleate teams around a conversation that you have or like an explore channel.

You can, I don't know, so that they happen before the weekends, they happen during the weekends, they happen after the weekend.

um sometimes they happen just for the weekend like like you frequently see people that are really excited and you know really want to like launch something but then like something happens and they they fall off the they don't they don't come back to the gym right like the first timer they get they get their muscles get sore or something like that right they twist an ankle um and and so you know you might not have um successful team formation takes really repeated

effort, like weekly meetings or bi-weekly meetings, especially if you have a goal that you're going to accomplish.

And, you know, Sasha and I are going to talk about team formation a lot today in our session and, and just, it's a delicate process and it's not easy and, and it's complex, maybe it's a complex system.

What, what makes a team and, you know, really what makes teams stay together and keep doing the work is like maintained interest, maintained time.


SPEAKER_05:
do we need to continue with our team after the weekend?


SPEAKER_07:
I think, actually, before giving the point to any team forum, I wanted to talk about that we're going to get into the team registration forum, but I really want to stress that it isn't permanent.

When you do register a team, like you were saying, it's a complex system, and it's actually a complex adaptive system.

It's changing.

It's going to evolve over the weekend.

fill out registration form knowing that you can always return to that registration form entry and edit it, right?

Because some people have already registered teams here and it's just them and they're really just communicating like, I really want to work on this and I really want to broadcast it out there so people can join that team.

So think of it as a dynamic thing, as an evolving thing.

When you do form that team, it's something that will likely evolve and actually probably should evolve.

Do you need to continue with the team after the weekend?

Again, to an earlier point,

Teams are going to look very different.

Just like facilitators look very different.

That's kind of the hallmark of Quik again is that it's a diverse group of different types that make it all work together.

And there's many, many different types of teams.

Some you can just leave for learning by doing for the weekend and that's it.

Everyone has very intense day jobs that they do not have the time to admit for teams after.

Some subsets of teams will want to continue and some won't.

I think the key thing is just as an individual to the team is communicate and really let everyone know where you're coming

and what you can contribute for the weekend and beyond or not.

Maybe Park or Justin are, hey, they're welcome.

If anyone has any thoughts just around maybe like teams that they form, not really the complex weekend at all, but what are some team dynamics that you've kind of experienced around longevity in teams or short-lived teams, just dynamics of teams?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I mean, that's a little bit of a loaded question, but I think that teams that end up becoming really successful, I mean, I think it really comes down to communication, right?

And setting some sort of, you know, expectation for the team.

That, you know, to hold people accountable in some capacity, right?

And everyone should be, you know, somewhat invested in living up to those expectations and being committed to a certain level.

And it could be, you know, a little bit of commitment, but that should be communicated properly.

Or a lot of commitment, right.

Uh, which should also be, you know, communicated.

I think like that all the team needs to be on the same page and that needs, you know, and in order to get on the same page, there needs to be a really great communication.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah.

I think, um, another thing that, uh, comes to mind about, um, having a good team is having a good narrative, right.

It's like establishing.

Um, kind of just like, um, how I run a lot of my discussions over for, um, other groups, I'm in the public library discord for, um, this other community.

And one of the things that we do is like towards the end of our discussions, um, I always try to synthesize the thinking of the whole space of the whole period.

Um, because I want there to be some sort of narrative.

Um, and I think that that's probably, um, I don't think I know that that's also really important for running the team is having like an aligning narrative, sort of like a mission that, um,

everything can follow with otherwise like people don't really know why they're there sometimes.

And be open to that changing as well is what I think is important is accepting people's inputs and accepting the mission moving and potentially getting rid of the mission altogether and creating a new mission because you realize the old mission didn't make any sense.

So yeah, I think that's something that really comes to mind is

really just like being very mission forward.


SPEAKER_04:
Just one.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Like start with the why Simon Sinek, you know, like what's the purpose behind it.

I think that's important.


SPEAKER_05:
And also to the idea of a team narrative.

So first it, just like Park said, it shows that one is listening and synthesizing information and it reminds us of why we're there, just like Justin said.

And then also for those who are joining the team,

even just a really quick recap, like A and B met after a facilitated session on this topic.

That started a really interesting discussion.

And then we met C and the three of us did this.

So welcome, you know.

another person you're part of our story you're part of this narrative and the genre can change maybe it was a comedy and then it becomes a horror or something like that so it's possible to have more chapters in a narrative and allow it to be a participatory co-creation so last question here for jessica how do i start or find a team


SPEAKER_00:
So there's two things.

It's asynchronous.

You can post in the key base, I need a team.

You can also check the participant SSOT teams tab.

Sean and Daniel, are you guys constantly updating that tab?


SPEAKER_03:
Yep.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, and you can show up in a gather.

So sometimes what happens is the conversation might start in a facilitator office hours or a conversation may start in one of the live sessions.

And the group you're talking with, there may be an idea that forms a team.

And if that's the case, you ask the facilitators and the organizers to, you can create the explore team and key base.

That one thing I also do is I, in the past when I've been on these weekends as a participant is I went and I browsed all the channels and I just would join and a bunch of them and start perusing what they started discussing.

And then from there I can narrow down what my interest is if I was kind of lost.

So that's another way to browse teams and figure out, narrow your interests.

And I think it was Park that mentioned this, that, you know, sometimes the mission changes and if a mission changes and it's not your interest anymore, you can always, you know, this is pretty open platform.

You can always wander over and be like, hey, what are you guys doing?

There's nothing wrong with that.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks, Jessica.

So Sean.


SPEAKER_07:
Sure.

So yeah, for the next few slides, we're gonna just talk about all the different ways of maybe starting or joining a team.

So we're just gonna throw all these options out there.

As a participant, it's really your role to explore all these different channels and see whatever works for you and what feels natural and comfortable to find.

If you want to be on a team for the weekend, our goal is,

that they will be a respected and valued member of one of these teams.

So here are all the different sounds I can think of, right?

So we've got, like Jessica was saying, the participant single truth, that's always the first talking issue

right at the top of that path.

And when you feel like you're ready to register a team, if that's your path, then that's the URL you go to to actually fill it out and let the cohort know that you exist.

And that will have a set of teams that have already registered.

And there's two types of teams there.

One are teams that participants have formed or participants facilitators, anyone in the cohort has formed.

And then, yeah, and then we'll probably show that.

And they'll have some information like,

working on, are they open to new participants?

That's a great avenue if you just see anything that's already formed, such as Teen Homer, homelessness, or how to help humans flourish.

Mycelium is like, Dan would probably talk about it, but it's more like a network of humans, maybe a collective evolution or something like that.

And if you resonate with any of that, reach out to the Keybase contact and say, I'm interested in your team.

That sounds really cool.

I may want to participate in that over the weekend.

And there's also the set of teams called Complexity Weekend Committees.

And these are just teams like any other teams, but they're public teams that work on Complexity Weekend outputs, such as the Gather Space we're all in, that was built by the Gather Committee.

So if you like any of the scopes of those teams, that's another great way to learn complexity by doing, where the complex system you're working on is Complexity Weekend, the event,

because there's our system that we're working with and learning by doing and unpacking complexity into.

So those are great opportunities to join a diverse team that is with that particular mission.

We'll go into team registration form shortly.

Maybe if you advance the next slide, I'll throw out a few more ways to engage.

There's the cohort jam board, which we're going to be looking at in the latter part of this.

We've already gone through it, and there's a lot of great content from the first live stream.

And for people just going in between the live streams and updating information, I know several people I talked to yesterday were using this channel as a way to engage and get people to maybe join their team.

So check out that Jamboard.

We'll pass the link around when the latter part of this live stream starts.

But put information up there.

You can say, well, I'm looking for these skills for my team.

There's lots of prompts and lots of really great postage people have already put up.

That's one great avenue.

The Keybase channels, it does go highlighting.

So there's the I Need a Team channel, which is focused on teams.

That's going to light up a lot right now as we make sure, as we're organizing these facilitators, that everybody watching on the team finds a team.

That's kind of the catch-all Keybase channel.

And then the Explorer channels, if you go into Keybase and you click the Keybase team name and you click the gear and browse all channels, you can see all these opt-in Explorer channels.

There's a ton of them by now because everyone's been asking for them to be generated for the whole pre-weekend and up until now.

And there's anything you can think of, you know, and if it isn't there, ask for a request and we will create it.

So they're not the quantum computing explorer channel or self organization or like a self run, self governance organization, whatever you may be interested in.

Join those panels and join the discussion because a lot of the times teams will seed in those channels and then go off and register and be a team for this at the beginning.

And then just engaging.

Anyone one-on-one on P-Base, if you go to a live session for a facilitator and you really enjoyed the discussion and you think you may want them on your team if they're willing to join or they may direct you somewhere, reach out one-on-one to them on P-Base.

That's always a great way and importance that our cohort has.

And then lastly, participating in Gather.

I mean, like I think Mark was mentioning earlier, it's very organic.

Like you'll be, especially with this on-off schedule, you'll be in a live session.

If people are really engrossed, they may continue on.

And that could be the beginning of a team.

So really just showing up and participating is really the best way.

And there's lots of different modes and affordances there.

Anyone want to comment on the join, start team there?


SPEAKER_05:
Just one thing is that some people bring a...

very well-primed project.

They think, I have everything but this, and then as soon as this piece gets plugged in, we're going to just take off, and there's already this is set up for the team.

And other times, it's almost the opposite.

It's like, wow, I'm really having a...

great conversation with you about this let's just meet periodically and see what we can develop here and it doesn't have to be oriented towards a specific kind of deliverable there's often a lot to be said for building some trust and some shared understanding before jumping into a specific opportunity depending on people's um availabilities so blue


SPEAKER_02:
So just also like some people bring a well-primed project and just like Complexity Weekend needs people to organize it, teams also need organization.

And it's helpful if you have those skills to organize a team.

And if you really know what it takes, like project management experience, smart sheets, Gantt charts, whatever, like people use all kinds of different ways to get things organized.

If you have those skills, it's helpful to any team that you're on.

To step into that role, it doesn't necessarily make you a leader, but it can make you an organizer.

So even if you don't want to necessarily spearhead the team, even teams that have like, you know, a great leader, but maybe someone that doesn't really know how to make things go forward.

So just if you have that kind of energy, you know, be sure to volunteer and kind of exert it because that's kind of what makes it work.


SPEAKER_05:
Let's talk about participating in Complexity Weekend as a team.

So would anyone else like to take the first pass on this?

All right, well, after you've filled out a team registration form or otherwise connected with a team,

you are kind of a multi-scale entity slash process or thing you can participate as an individual you can build on some of those pairwise connections and participate at the dyad scale like hey fun conversation but i see that blue session is starting in five minutes we should head over there together so that's kind of like participating in complexity weekend as a relationship and then there's participating in complexity weekend as a team

So one of the things that is on the registration form is asking if you'd like a team co-working space and that's to the right of the main room.

And the co-working space is fun because your name's on the floor and you can just post and say, whether it's just a message with your team or to the cohort,

KeyBase team, hey, you know, from this time to this time, UTC, we're just going to be co-working and chilling and feel free to drop by if you might like to join.

So that can be a really approachable way to have new people join and also progress on what you're working on.

And then there's that green call block, which opens a Jitsi window.

And so that's one way to get a stakeholder connected early.

So I know Sean has been emphasizing that

since the beginning, that the earlier that one can reach out and get other stakeholders connected is helpful for the team.

So maybe just before we continue on, Sean, what do you want to say about that?


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, I want to highlight that importance.

I think it's one that's historically underutilized.

And just to highlight what that is.

So if you go up and gather to that green call block, it's interactive logic.

And when you press X, it'll open up a page that says, here's the Jitsi URL.

It's unique to your team.

And a Jitsi URL is basically Zoom, but in the browser.

You don't need a profile to join in.

You just go to the URL and boom, you're in a call, a video call.

And like we said in the past, only people in our cohort could be in the Gather space or could be in Keybase.

But your team needs information from the outside world to really flourish.

If you're going to

For example, you know, you're working on some healthcare solution.

It's really great to talk to a nurse, right?

For somebody who has some experience, lived experience with it, because it's so easy to over-intellectualize or to, you know, have a biased model going into this that just that one conversation between your team and a real life stakeholder can cut so many assumptions out that may otherwise have sent you down the wrong path.

So all you have to do in order to do that is go up and gather with whoever in the team and your team wants to engage in this way.

Press X, open the Jitsi, right?

And then pass that URL to anyone in the outside world.

And if they join that URL, boom, they're in the video call with you giving feedback.

And that's something that facilitators can help with too, right?

You can grab your own Jitsi URL for your team in your team Corpi space and say, blue, here's the Jitsi URL for the team homelessness, right?

The team homeless, right?

Do you know anyone who may be a good stakeholder to talk to?

Can you pass that link to them?

And we'll be waiting at this time to receive anyone that you send it to.

That's an importance that hasn't really been used much, but it's so key this weekend to just get really novel information that sets you on a good initial position route for your team.


SPEAKER_05:
Yep, the cohort is not a lifeboat.

It's not that we're trying to just shell up.

It's part of a broader ecosystem, so that really helps remind us of that.

Park?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I want to understand the purpose of the Jitsi thing here.

Not understand it, I just want to synthesize it just so I make sure I understand what your intention is here.

So if you have a team and you feel you want to bring in someone who's not a part of the team and maybe not even a part of Complexity Weekend into the productive mindset or what it is, the sense-making event that you're trying to explore as a team, it gives you the ability to just say, hey, we're going to be here at this time.

X person, if you know someone who may be useful, please send them this link and they can just show up at this time.

Is that right?


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, and the inspiration behind it.

One of the events that is an inspiration to Convice Weekend is actually Startup Weekend.

And I don't know if anyone's participated in Startup Weekend, but one of the big mantras during Startup Weekend is to get out of the building.

That's what they say.

And usually it's an in-person physical event.

And it means get out of the building where Startup Weekend is occurring, go talk to potential customers.

It's all about starting businesses over the course of the weekend.

So if you're going to create a point of sales replacement for small businesses, where are the 10 small businesses over the weekend that you talked to that you got enough feedback to know if it's viable?

So that's the inspiration here.

We're obviously a global online event.

So we have different importances than where perhaps even better importances where you have this great set of 30, 35 facilitators of all these different perspectives and backgrounds.

So if you have any needs that are informational in terms of, this doesn't have to be someone who's going to join your team necessarily.

It might be, but it could just be information you want or like a 30 minute conversation.

You know, in Keybase and some facilitator may ask someone in their network, they just pass a link to it and that's all.


SPEAKER_05:
One other thought on that.

So Sean highlighted some of the inspiration and some of the rationale for this type of affordance in Startup Weekend, complex systems, they're sensitive to initial conditions and small perturbations.

And also from that narrative perspective, the team,

undertaking a joint action to reach some external party by defining them as external it actually um reifies what the team is so like 20 minutes after fulfilling the team registration form you could send an email say greetings x we're a team formed at complexity weekend and we're looking at the intersection of a and b we wondered if we could just talk to you at any point about this now

will you be likely to find an availability in a 12 hour window?

Maybe, maybe they'll get back to you on Monday and you can find another time to talk, but it's really cool just to know that you can reach out and that there's a way to kind of bring them into our loop, but not into the gather space where there's a guest list, but connect with them on the Jitsi.

So that's fun.

Um,

to return to the weekend program and how to participate as a team.

So keeping that kind of even facilitated session and odd facilitator office hours rhythm in mind, you can divide and conquer on the facilitated live sessions.

Like if there's two happening at once, you can say, well, some of us are going to go here, some of us are going to go there.

And in the off hours, you can get great insights from facilitators or you can use that time to co-work.

And that is sort of like, now you're connected with your team and now the colony can forage a little bit differently than the solitary individual.

Then we would just remind the team that they can still post in the Jamboard and signal that they're open to more participants joining.

And then something that I'll talk about in my facilitated session about recording a video as a team for the closing live stream on Sunday.

So it's hard to believe, but that's like tomorrow and that's our final live stream.

And during that live stream, we like to play

five to 10 minute recorded videos by teams or feature them on the live stream.

However, having a prerecorded video, there's no chance of lag or of just somebody who might not want to speak spontaneously on the live stream, which is totally understandable for a presentation.

But we'll talk more about that later.

In the closing live stream, the teams are encouraged but not required to share.

So live streams are public.

So again, people can show up however they want.

No one is required to be on the live stream or to use video if they don't want to.

And it's going to be on Sunday.

So just check the schedule, the program.

There's some things to avoid and some things to focus on.

So there's no need to recount the specifics of what you built or the exact plan for how you're going to solve the problem.

What you can focus on and what's important to think about during the weekend, as well as to communicate at the end of it, is your shared purpose, your diverse perspectives, problems defined, feedback gathered, potential approaches, and how you'll continue after the weekend, which is something that we're going to be talking more about in the Jamboard section of this live stream.

And then we're basically going to take the total amount of time that we have for that live stream and divide it by however many teams have RSVP'd to communicate on the live stream.

And then they'll all have that many minutes to give their presentation.

So...

This is a awesome way to just put a little send off to your team and show what you did over the weekend, which to be honest is vast and great to connect globally, maybe with someone who you didn't know 48 hours ago and have a new direction and a new excitement, new curiosity and new opportunities.

It's really special.

And it doesn't have to be everything.

You can just say, we're going to be doing a lot of research and connecting with people more knowledgeable about how to apply this area to that area.

And that is already locating you very well within the broader space of the possible.

And then as always, before, during, or after the weekend, Complexity Team Keybase or complexityweekend.gmail.com are there to help you with anything.

Sean, and then anyone else with a raised hand.


SPEAKER_07:
I think one thing I just want to highlight is if you record a video or you come up with a presentation or how your team may want to communicate during the Sunday live stream to our cohort, but also publicly to public live stream, it's not just for Sunday.

You're not just doing it as deliverable for Sunday.

Communicating is a key way for your team to position itself in the world, to broadcast to potential new team members what you're up to, and it

who may want to join, positioning with respect to potential customers or partners or whatever your outcome may be, whether that's business oriented or academic or any of these, you know, grants or anything, communicating is so key to that.

And this is just another exercise in healthy habits as a team to succeed in the world.

Yeah, anyone want to talk, I guess, about communication or strategies maybe for the Sunday live stream?


SPEAKER_05:
Well, just because it's my session, I'll just say that free and simple and very flexible tools are available for recording sound and images on your computer.

So it's something that people often wonder about, like how is it possible to crop a section of screen and record it?

we'll go over that and in less than an hour you'll be able to make some basic kinds of recordings even see how to live stream how to introduce live captioning into your videos which can help with accessibility so there's a lot of opportunities i know justin and others are whizzes with video as well but this is a really fun and important skill that can help like take a cool conversation

and make it something that can be shared.


SPEAKER_07:
Dan, do you want to talk about the team registration for me before the slide?

We have a little bit of time to go through that.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.

So I'm going to go to the participant, single source of truth.

So here's the front page with all the links.

Like here's the slide deck that we're going through right now.

Here's the jam board that we're going to be using later.

And there's the program, which is always where to go if you're curious about timings of activities.

Then in the teams tab, we can see the complexity weekend committees and then the cohort teams that have already been entered.

And then we'll click on the team registration form and let's look through it.

So the first thing to note is that if you fill out the form and signal that your team is open to having participants from the cohort join, so if you say no to this question, we will not share that on the Teams tab, any information on your team.

Also, if you don't wanna fill out the form, your team just wants to be stealth, that's great, totally fine.

If you say yes, though, that you're open to having participants join, you want to be visible and accessible, then some information will be shared, specifically whether you're open, the Keybase username of contact, what question or issue, and just the keywords.

So let's go over the questions.

So we ask about an email point of contact, a team or project name, all these are editable, and the current people who are on your team.

We then ask for some email addresses for whoever might like to be contacted with updates from Complexity Weekend.

Just so there's one main email point of contact, but also we will keep multiple people in the loop.

Then we ask whether the team would like its name posted above a co-working space in Gather, which we talked about here.

Then we ask if your team has a Keybase team.

So it's really easy in Keybase to go over to the Teams tab and then create a team and make a unique team name.

And then that's a way for you to control who is in that team and also have a ton of subchannels if you want.

So it allows you to kind of make your own niche and modify it for the way that your team wants to work going forward.

And it's not required to use the tools that we use for the weekend in your team.

So if you want to use a different asynchronous and synchronous option, great.

Do what works for you.

Then we ask whether you're open to having new team members join over the weekend.

So could be a yes, could be a no.

There's the Keybase username or point of contact.

We then ask what question or issue will your team be addressing?

And that's actually a discussion opportunity for the team to give a first draft on that.

And it can evolve, but this is basically the North Star alignment of the team.

Like, wait, why are we doing this instead of anything else we could be doing?

Ah, yes, because there's an important issue out there.

And actually this reminds me of what Park said very early about the emotionality of

These are not impartial problems we're talking about.

Real lives are on the line with supply chain, with power, with climate change.

So there is a real system and that can come through when we talk about why we're addressing the problems that we're addressing.

Some optional questions about how complexity informs your team approach.

People always ask like, what does it look like to apply complexity?

Who's applying complexity?

How do we apply complexity?

Here's an opportunity to have that discussion and say, we take phase transitions seriously.

And so we're thinking about this system as one that could or is or did undergo a phase transition.

So our whole perspective is shaped by the complexity idea of a phase transition.

That's pretty cool.

And that's just one idea in our toolkit.

we ask about describing the system or ecosystem that the problem is embedded within.

Because if we don't look beyond the problem itself, sometimes we could lend towards single disciplinary solutions.

And this reminds me of facilitator Denise and Barb and the what is water and the awareness of systems and how different problems are related.

And it's something that has come up, I think, in many sessions and conversations.

providing some keywords or phrases to describe the problem and the stakeholders for the project.

And then we ask about whether you'd like to present during the live stream, whether with a video or joining live.

And then if you'd like any help with recording, learning how to record or having us record it for you, then we're there to help you.

Finally, we ask about facilitators, whether you're working with any or you'd like to.

We ask whether any individuals on your team would be interested in using some software tools that are very generously provided to us by a supporter, Wolfram, and then just any feedback or any other information that you'd like to provide for the organizers.

So that's the form.


SPEAKER_07:
One quick thing I want to add, Daniel, is that I think one of the great conceptions of, again, it's my favorite part, actually, is filling out the team registration form produces almost like

All this time you've invested into learning how to engage with Complexity Weekend, all this tooling, you know, Keybase, Gather, communication styles, recording videos, if you go that route, all of that is not just for this weekend.

It's actually the initial positions for your team.

So by filling out this registration form, at the end of it, you'll have a Keybase team, just like our cohort Keybase team.

You'll be able to create a Gather space if you want to, for virtual headquarters, a place to engage with anyone online.

You know, recording videos is something, or doing live streams is something

All the skills you've invested in are actually something that can kick off a team effort and is by no means the only way to do team dynamics.

You can always evolve from there in any way.

You can decide not to use Keybase with some other asynchronous text communication tool.

So that's always a fun thing, a realization that we all have all the tools now to do really, really good remote global collaborative work.


SPEAKER_05:
we're going to come back to it in the Jamboard as well, kind of drill down onto that.

And so just to kind of close this first part of the live stream with slides, the level of commitment is up to you.

And that comes back to what Justin said about communicating, not just the vision, but also availability.

If someone says, I am really excited, but here's the reality.

I have one hour at this time or one random hour per week, and I can't even know when.

don't compare that to some hypothetical universe where you have more time.

That might be stressful.

Let's compare it to a universe where the project isn't happening.

And then we can see any contributions that we make to the project as very special and enabled contributions to something unique.

So whether you just wanna check in once in a while or whether someone's life and situation lets them really

take the lead and drive the project or conduct it or facilitate it in a way that gets something done over a few weeks or months, which we've seen many times before, that's up to the team.

And so we're just laying out the space and some of the conversations that are important to have, but there's no one way to have a team.

And so that's a conversation to have.

And then just a reminder that Complexity Weekend is a community of practice.

And so the community is always there for you.

You're always welcome to join the heartbeats and the weekends again and again as an individual.

relationship or team.

So it's so cool when a whole team RSVPs for a heartbeat and say, one of us is going to give a spotlight talk and the rest of us are going to support them.

Or one of our team members is going to be a facilitator at this heartbeat.

And the session is going to be on something we're working on because we want to

test our approach.

We want to see if any participants might want to join the team.

There's so many things that you can do when you continue to return to the community with or without the team.

And you can do post-mortem on the team.

You come back the heartbeat and you just go, look, I just, I don't know what happened.

This, this, this.

And then there's going to be really experienced complexity collaborators who will be able to provide their view.

And they'll be complexity beginners who will also importantly contribute their view.

So that's what community is about.

And Blue, maybe you want to speak to the timing of meeting and goal setting.


SPEAKER_02:
course you give this to me right um uh really like um timing meetings um you know daniel said like synchronous asynchronous if you're really like set on working on something you will find time to work on it so whether it's like you know from 11 to midnight every night like just stay up and and trudge through it um but but you have to have that kind of level of of commitment and so

With a team I've met across global time zones, it can be really difficult.

So perhaps it's best to schedule like most of your work asynchronously.

Like if you're trying to go from New Mexico to Denmark is like really kind of, for some reason, very difficult to arrange meeting times.

And there's other times like the Netherlands and, you know, there's other times that are a kind of wonky Australia.

So, you know, but you can find a time.

So just work with your team, commit,

do most of your work asynchronously.

If you have clearly defined goals and structure, you can limit your synchronous meeting time.

But if you have the available time and you're a procrastinator like me, the more meetings you have, the better, because then you tend to, at least I tend to do all of my work right before the meeting.

Like, okay, I'm going to wake up at four.

My meeting's at nine.

I'm going to spend the next five hours working on the project.

And then when I meet at nine, I'll have some outcome.

so that's i think for me the best way to work but everybody's different and you kind of have to work with your team and the flow of what um is going to you know work best for for all of your group and your members but really having clearly defined goals roles

And outcomes is what's going to make it push forward.

And yeah, so all of the any time that that is, it will work for you guys.

And if you can limit your synchronous time and structure well, then a lot of the work can really be done asynchronously.


SPEAKER_05:
And the team composition and goals can evolve a lot, which I can speak to but park.


SPEAKER_06:
I was just going to say, I mean, one of the things I'm noticing and have been thinking about a lot in learning about y'all's facilitation method and the way you're putting this together is

just how much it applies to the idea of remote teams in work as well.

So I just want to compliment you all on that because you've given, I think, a lot of people a lot of tools and a lot of thinking of how it is to potentially like things like run a company around some of these tools, because I think that there's a lot of people who are very stuck in the thinking of

using legacy tools that are not really well suited for the conditions that we're in right now and that, frankly, are going to continue being our future, right?

Like, it's undeniable.

And so the thing I was going to say on the coattails of what you said, Blue, was that the insynchronicity question is so fascinating to me.

Because I do think that such flexible thinking comes out of meetings sometimes, but then what gets lost is you have flexible thinking, but there's no codification.

You have a good sense-making event, but there's no formal document to align it.

And so it's interesting because then you have the opposite with an asynchronous setting.

where you have too much codification and inflexible thinking.

You don't have the dynamism.

So I'm interested, I would love, and this is maybe not a question to have answered in the next minute, but if you have found sort of a medium between those two that allows you to have the creative event of working with people while not needing to be in the same time zone, or if we have to wait until we figure out some way to time travel using digital technology to do that.


SPEAKER_05:
uh pending time travel machines which may have yet already been deployed i think the asynchronous is the best we can do and so just recognizing that partition is the first step like recognizing hey it's really unlikely that with the people being in this this and this location it's unlikely for us to have a synchronous meeting let's try to get one on the calendar for a month from now but over the next month let's not

just wait let's work on this share document let's post all the resources let's provide weekly check-ins asynchronously there's just a million things that you can do that um build on that and then just think of it as like the sun never setting on your team rather than us being fragmented and oh i wish we could be in person it's just not that way so um blue at the end shot


SPEAKER_02:
So in person is different than like, like we're in person now.

And so, I mean, this is like a great way.

I mean, digitally, like, I don't think we need to be able to synchronously meet anymore.

I think we've all gotten used to, you know, the tools that are available to us.

And, and if you haven't, we're happy to, to kind of guide the path.

Like you guys are going to get into a jam board next.

And,

There are lots of ways, like, yeah, I would love to be working in a glass room with dry erase markers and, you know, floor-to-ceiling windows.

That's my preference.

But in the absence of that, like, I guess a jam board will work.

So, I mean, we kind of have to adapt to the circumstances that we're given.

But the synchronicity, I think, if more than...

You can have awesome brainstorming sessions with an incomplete team.

So say like three of you are available, but three of you are not.

So get together, you know, in your asynchronous schedules and then bring everyone up to speed in a synchronized meeting and make the time, right?

So even if it's monthly, like that's where you get that flexibility of thinking and it doesn't have to involve the whole team.

Things can evolve without everyone present and then just, you know, they go as they go.

So I think we just do the best we can balancing those things, synchronous and asynchronous.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks, Blue.

So it's been one hour of this live stream.

So to those facilitators who would like to depart, thank you for joining the live stream.

Have a fun rest of your day.

We're going to continue on to the Jamboard.

So we'll head over to the Jamboard, which you can go find from the first page of the PSSOT to the Jamboard.

So row seven.

Yes.


SPEAKER_07:
Can we just...

that justin and just don't want to give a closing remark kind of off everything up to this point and then anyone who wants to stay for the jam board feel free to stick around sounds good and we'll just keep going for the next hour sounds good so yes any closing thoughts justin go for it yeah i mean i think this whole like you know sync uh synchronicity um kind of


SPEAKER_04:
you know, question or just problem, whether it is a problem or not.

I think that's just very interesting to me because like up until, you know, very recently, right?

Like we, most people have been productive in these more like synchronous kind of settings and most human problems that have been solved up to this point have been more, you know, done in a more synchronous fashion.

So we are amidst this transition in a way, I think.

And it's quite fascinating.

Like I'm very optimistic, I'm sanguine as to what problems will be solved in these more asynchronous ways.

It's just exciting to kind of think about like how productivity is gonna change and

how human culture and civilization is going to move, given that we are going to be solving problems, you know, in a more asynchronous, you know, fashion moving forward.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you, Justin.

Would anyone else like to give a closing thought who would like to depart the live stream?


SPEAKER_00:
I was going to add that that's kind of one of the, you know,

our world did function in a synchronous fashion for so long.

And one of the, the, I don't want to say benefits, but one of the pros of everything being locked down with COVID is those who do thrive and asynchronous environments got a chance to shine.

I've had some work because everyone's had to work asynchronously.

That's been more productive than if we were meeting in person every week.

And, but I found that we have to be conscious of those who do thrive better with the synchronous work.

Like there's some that, that those weekly meetings are the only times they're going to be, they're going to have the highest productivity, but there's a large number that are more productive without everyone there at the same time.

And I feel like it's a benefit.

And I think we are, there's been a shift.

Justin was mentioning, there's a shift and there's,

I don't think we would have this asynchronous environment with Complexity Weekend if we hadn't been in lockdown to the extent we do.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you.

Would anyone else like to make a departing comment?


SPEAKER_07:
I think it's good.


SPEAKER_06:
No, I'm just, I have to go walk my dog, but I want to see if I can jump in on the Jamboard afterward.

Okay?

Of course.


SPEAKER_05:
So we'll head to the Jamboard.

And as we just remember all the slides that we had looked at previously about the intention, about how we discovered complexity, learning and applying, how those come together.

And you can see many people have added more information.

We talked about complexity having impact, and we're going to

pick up in the team member slide, but actually I just wanted to give one comment while people are loading up the Jamboard.

There are words that sound similar, but they're not the same meaning, which is synchronous and synchronicity, and not to call anyone out on a technicality because it's actually a very rich similarity.

Synchronous is at the same time, like synchronized activity, but synchronicity is...

is actually a concept from Jungian psychodynamics.

And it's defined as when events co-occur, so indeed they are synchronous, but they're given meaning in a way that goes beyond their mere co-occurrence.

So that's like a synchronous event that's

in a narrative context that becomes a synchronicity.

And that's like where serendipity comes into the picture.

Serendipity requires synchronous activity as a prerequisite.

The people have to be there at the train station at the same time, in the same place to meet.

But that's not just serendipity because you don't say it's serendipitous that you and the stranger you didn't talk to were next to each other.

And so I think it's a little subtle etymological difference

trick, but it reveals how people are starting to think about the time that we do share as not just being bundled together, but actually special opportunities to add layers of meaning.

So that's kind of cool.

In this Jamboard session, we're going to just be kind of continuing this theme of teams, the team theme.

So we're going to...

have the YouTube live chat open, but mainly we'll be just in this Jamboard and recognizing that many in our cohort will be checking this later.

So we're going to pick up at slide number eight and let's just recap some of the ways that people are looking for certain perspectives, as well as wanting to join a team.

And then we'll get into some other discussions and see where it goes from there.

All right, so first let's look at on the left side as I kind of resize this.

So our team is missing the following perspectives, skill sets and disciplines.

So for those who are like, what teams can I join?

Well, here's two answers.

One is go to the PSSOT, check out the teams that already filled out a form and contact these people if you're interested in these questions.

If you want to be contributing to Complexity Weekend, check out our committees and what they're working on, or step up to co-organize.

But let's look at it in the Jamboard.

So here's the mycelium team, seeking systems designers, thinkers, feelers, skilled diplomats, networkers, data administration for specialists, for realizing human equivalent mycelial networks.

regenerative comp, skills in biomimicry and other areas.

It's just so cool how a lot of these teams, including this team with James Norris, creating a team around solving human flourishing.

These teams kind of connect the technical and the computational

and the modern with some timeless questions.

So those are awesome teams.

And then here's individuals who are wanting to join a team.

So thanks for being brave and for stepping up and writing your information there.

there's a lot of experience and a lot of perspectives that people can share.

So just wanted to kind of recap that before we head into the community support.

Justin or Jessica, anything you wanted to add on this or we can continue.


SPEAKER_00:
I'm just trying to figure out like, so I think that's something people need to remember is to keep checking back at the Jamboard because things get so complex and key-based.

And so there's sometimes a disconnect if something's been posted here, but it's not been seen in Keybase or vice versa.

So to just, if you're looking for a team or you're missing a discipline to make sure you're cross-checking.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks.

So yeah, I totally agree.

There can be a lot of information sources.

And sometimes you just, you know, you go to sleep and you wake up and there's new key-based messages and there's a different set of people and gather.

So how to stay on top of that and just, it's a fun ride.

Let's kind of think about, well, first let's go to slide nine.

because we'll stay on the team theme before widening our lens a bit.

How do we collaborate on complex problems?

Big canvas and space that people can start to add any comments on as they switch to slide nine.

this is sort of the nuts and the bolts of collaboration and it's something where no one has the final recipe or playbook and it's a question that we'll be able to return to weekend after weekend and it's something that just

prompting can allow us to share our experiences with what has and hasn't worked on the complex projects that we've been a part of.

And then welcome Michaela.

Thank you for joining.

And any facilitator is welcome to just leave or join as they see fit.

um it's a question that allows us to share our own experiences across areas and think towards the the modern and future environment of complex projects like justin it's it's such an important point you raised that human solutions have been based upon synchronous activity it almost like

things like Wikipedia, they're so normal nowadays that it's like, well, yeah, that kind of a digital asynchronous system exists to compile knowledge.

But even writing is relatively recent in its mass deployment.

And so seeing the big picture and how digital asynchronous work relates to collaboration on complex problems like

the first chapter is just starting so if anybody wants to just unmute we'll see it here and be able to um yep go for justin yeah no i i agree i think uh the internet really largely is enabling people to be um you know more asynchronous


SPEAKER_04:
But even the building of the platforms that enable such asynchronous activity were developed largely in a synchronous kind of way.

So that is fascinating.


SPEAKER_05:
Very interesting point how...

one system can actually, in the mode of operating that it knows, can build a system, like a little nested one, an intranet,

that then becomes a norm when it spreads beyond that that's a very interesting point so let's look at some of these comments that people are writing so um think of unintended consequences of your solutions or approaches will it provide positive benefits through deep time you know

one talk that i remember hearing about um microfinance by professor matt jackson who's an economics professor at stanford was about how they looked at villages that had deployed microfinance lending or not and they did a very holistic

assessment of the social and some of the cultural measurables in the village and the social network and people's behavior.

And it turned out that there were some things that improved and there were some things that actually did not improve because there had been a community

economic network that people helped each other out in and the microloans temporarily alleviated some of that.

However, it was questionable whether that actually left the village and the network in a better place than it had been.

So that's just an example about how you can't just drop nutrients on an ecosystem and think that the ecosystem will be permanently in a better position.

Maybe it causes a algal bloom and then that ends up putting the ecosystem in a worse place after sort of a kind of short period of exuberance.

So these questions about thinking through deep time and about the possible consequences

outcomes and the trajectories that the system can follow that's why it's important to have a very to bring together diverse minds all perspectives that may be necessary to get at the root of the problem

So that's one kind of thread there.

So here's another set that people are starting to connect here.

Find the interconnections.

Be a connector for others in our community of practice.

Create and join networks.

So networks are a big topic in complexity.

And these grouped notes are kind of like

maybe when we just connect things connect ideas or connect people we might be whether we know it or not collaborating on a complex project it could be like you know when you connected ethics to the ecosystem as a complex system

incubated on that for a couple months and then it really changed how i thought about both those areas and now we're in 2022 and i think i'm finally ready to fill out that team registration form and see who else wants to join me on that journey so it's all good that the timeline on complex projects isn't always the um same that we see in our day job because it's not just about the

project being about a complex system or even using the complexity perspective.

It's about just recognizing the ways that projects kind of play out in our current environment.

So let's, and anyone can just unmute and give thoughts.

So be candid about what you can bring and what you need.

So maybe that's kind of related to this one.

Like,

identifying and aligning cycles so it's related to the communication you know if somebody has a certain availability or preference or capacity or requirement no one's going to guess it so being candid is uh very helpful adopt an eagle view that could mean many things but maybe a high flying view related to this

interdisciplinarity so seeing across the landscape and uh not just looking at it one way flying around in circles maybe also we can think about other views the insects who are seeing it from the grounds like adopt an eagle view but it's not just about the eagle's view


SPEAKER_01:
So if I may jump in, it's like being an explorer.

Whenever you encounter a wicked problem, you kind of see only the small thing that is wicked to you.

And then if you take your hiking boots and have a look at the landscape and push it a little bit further to the left, and you're escorted by a guide for this, you discover other linked and related problems or solutions.

And in the end, you can map the whole island.


SPEAKER_03:
Hmm.


SPEAKER_05:
Interesting.

I think there's the mapping of the island.

And then there's, you know, what if one person wants to turn it into a resort and the other wants it to be a refuge for butterflies?

And the other has this estimate about where the sea level is going to be in a hundred years.

And the other has this estimate.

Like that's where the collaboration part comes into play.

It's the activity and the team orientation.

It's not just how do we,

think and feel the same way about complex systems that's an important question too but in a way it's very different from asking how we collaborate on the projects like people can collaborate on a bridge physically and have different narratives of what the bridge is doing or why it's being there someone says I'm just showing up someone says this is really vital for this community

So people can have different understandings when they're shared in their working.

So that's kind of one interesting aspect of communities of practice and about teams is we don't ignore the question of shared belief and vision and perspective, but by focusing on the application and on the process of work and collaboration,

We create space to value different perspectives among team members.

That's related to what someone just put here.

Find the disagreements and explore them respectfully.

Yeah, definitely related to being candid because disagreeing with somebody who maybe you just met or maybe you've known them for a long time, it's never easy to say,

Thanks for sharing.

However, I really have to disagree with what you just said.

You know, use the I messages and things like that.

But it's those disagreements that can generate friction that warms the team.

And it's a tension that might be resolved.

Maybe somebody updates their model to a better or a different way of thinking.

Or maybe that disagreement or contrast is...

maintained and space is held for that.

For example, I've worked on projects where maybe some people saw that it was part of a bigger direction towards technology having some role in the world.

And I saw a disagreement amongst the team members in the implications of the project.

Now that's an interesting context to work in because it wasn't that we had to wait for agreement to proceed, but also, you know, there's no win-win.

When there's disagreement in a team, it risks kind of just, it's like a debt that's not being paid because maybe that disagreement is going to come up later just a hundred times worse.


SPEAKER_00:
converge and emerge so can i add something about disagreements yes of course um so something uh you know sometimes as you said sometimes it's just going to be there and to be in the space um sometimes take a more i i would i think and it doesn't always work this way take a more mindful uh

direction with it.

And sometimes if a project's going, let's say you wanted to build a model and you disagree on how the model, some cases people will just leave because they don't want to be a part of that because they disagree.

But sometimes staying in and embracing that disagreement and embracing the uncomfortableness of it, you might learn something that could change your view on the disagreement later on.

So that's why I encourage


SPEAKER_04:
yes and that's almost why oh yeah justin uh-huh oh yeah i was just gonna like agree like i think sometimes you learn the most uh through disagreement like some of the the most important lessons are to be learned um you know via disagreement yes and that's why trust and showing up for each other and having a shared


SPEAKER_05:
desire for the team to be coherent and consistent that is what gives us kind of that wiggle room or flexibility to hold the disagreement because if the team is built around how we conceptually agree then this is like a lethal blow but if the team is built around addressing a shared problem then

Maybe the fact that one person wants to go this way and the other wants to go that way.

That's like, let's do both.

Let's forage on both trails or what would be the minimum step we could take on each direction to start to see whose approach might be preferable.

Or maybe we're going to find out that they're both important to do simultaneously.

Justin?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I mean, I think that that's part of, like, healthy debate as well.

It's, you know, it's teasing out, you know, all of the differences, like the, you know, and trying to find...

you know, to, to, to view like these problems from, from all these various perspectives too, right?

Because everyone is coming in, you know, from all these, all these different kind of disciplines, all these different backgrounds.

So,

And it can be tough, right?

Because one person's view of it might be at odds with another person's.

And it's like, how do you find the common ground?

How do you figure out what that solution is amidst maybe some of these different views?


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks.

Cool.

So collect on group level personal strengths to solve personal weaknesses, e.g.

a person with deep understanding of subject matter collaborates with someone strong in methods.

So I'm going to kind of connect that to the converge and emerge.

so it's like we converge when we have those synchronous the synchronicity experiences when we converge and there's a gathering maybe in gather we come together and then there's emergence because there's something happening it's not just three people in three separate gather rooms you know it's like three lanes on a highway but when three people are together you

You get the three body problem.

You get the double pendulum.

You get all these cool complexity outcomes.

And then emerge can be thought of like multiple ways.

There's that one sense of emergence, just where the behavior is unpredictable or different from the behavior of the subunits alone.

And then there's like emerging like a larva.

or emerging from a movie theater and you kind of go out into the sunlight, like that convergence that you have, it will end.

That conversation will end, even if only for a quick break or for a week or for longer.

And so the individuals emerge back into their behavioral flow.

And that's part of the emergence of the team is we're going to synchronize during this conversation

maybe to discuss what are our,

and what are our capacities?

How is the puzzle going to come together?

What can one person contribute?

This person is totally just learning about complexity, but they have a lot of experience with spreadsheets and with project management.

And so they're just going to be really good at trying to learn and keep that eagle eye view.

And that might scaffold somebody who is a subject matter expert in a really important way.

so that convergence and that candid conversation about well this is what i do like to do and this is what i don't like to do and i have this much time per week that candid conversation and the alignment of cycles can lead to the emergence of a team and also maybe there's some new outcomes as well so that's fun um comments

bring in curiosity and humility ask questions like the Socratic method so there's asking questions you know came up earlier on when it was about how people came to complexity

and uh i won't go over to it but people did say a lot of people were saying just i got here because of asking questions and it's like you don't have to stop asking questions is still a really awesome way to collaborate and contribute to complex problems what do you what do you think michaela


SPEAKER_01:
I think questions are the best way to further problems or solutions.

If you ask, I mean, you've all had a two-year-old that is annoying you like crazy because they always ask why, why, why, why, or how, or why is it that way?

And I think it's a great method of pushing people who are in their own disciplines to kind of look at things in a fresh way when people from outside come and ask them why.


SPEAKER_05:
Yes.

Why is it done the way it is today?


SPEAKER_01:
Or why not?


SPEAKER_05:
Yes.

How could it be different?

Why would we want it to be different?

So to kind of stay on the team theme and connect all of these important reminders about collaborating on complex projects, let's go back to the specifics.

Like these are teams here on slide eight.

And in the PSSOT, these are teams that are really being accessible and they want you to participate if you are interested.

So that's kind of the general stuff about collaboration.

But here's the teams and the people who are looking for a team.

And so that's...

always important to kind of really recognize and acknowledge these people on both sides of the table who are putting it out there.

They're being brave by saying that they're looking for a team member or that they want to join a team.

And so Kai in the live chat wrote,

Friction is how bone creates resilience, holding the best of two opposites in a special spatial arrangement to allow for toughness, strength, and resilience.

So a lot to be said about the way that mild stress can provide growth.

Like in zero gravity, strong bones will not appear.

But of course, there's loads that will not allow healthy bones to develop either.

So maybe how do we identify that kind of zone of optimal stress or optimal challenge, the zone of optimal learning for individuals and teams when we are


SPEAKER_04:
looking at big problems talking about big ideas we're not going to solve it in 30 minutes on this live stream but i'd love to hear anyone's thoughts because that's something that we probably all face every day yeah i i think this uh goes into you know this is very related to um getting to a flow state right because you don't want to um you don't want to be like

at a point where you know everything that you're doing to where it's boring, right?

Because that's not the optimal, there's no stress there, right?

It's just, it's boring, you know it, and you're not learning.

But you also don't want to be working on something that

That is too new and difficult because then it's really hard to get into a flow.

So you need that perfect kind of like middle point where you are able to be very productive because you have a certain amount of knowledge.

But you also don't want to be bored because then it gets really impossible to get into a flow state.

It gets mundane.

And I think this also goes back to happiness as well.

People that tend to get into flow states on a regular basis are happier humans.

So I don't know, I might have just like hijacked that a bit, but I think, yeah, I think it's related.

And I think like if teams can try to get into a flow state, I think they're going to be more productive and I think they're going to enjoy it more as well.


SPEAKER_05:
cool to bring up the flow state and the multi-scale flow state there's the single person and then there's the team flow and what does team flow look like how would we know or what does it feel like as an individual to be in a team that's in flow

And that's why these capacities are important because the problems are big.

The challenge is high.

The cognitive overload can be real.

And so to be in flow state, it's going to be some kind of compromise between defining the specifics of our problem and approach

to cut down from the vast and possibly infinite complexity while also leveling up ourselves so that we can meet somewhere in the middle where we might be on that flow corridor um oh cool someone just dropped this in so here's flow in the overlap between discipline and surrender very interesting

or maybe it's just a cultural understanding of these shapes to say that this is an overlap but we'll put it there anyway fun well um in the last 25 minutes or so and also just thanks awesome facilitators for staying on we can just join or leave whenever you want for any of these live streams let's

talk a little bit about like, already we're kind of looking towards the end almost, you know, the weekend is short.

So let's go to 10.

Let's just talk a little bit about what makes Complexity Weekend an amazing space, some of the appreciations and desires, as well as the tensions and frictions, and kind of remind ourselves of the participation guidelines and also iterate on them and

what insights have we had already over the weekend that could contribute to the design of Complexity Weekend through deep time, but also maybe things that we can implement in the next 24 hours when we're hanging out and gather in Keybase.

And then we'll kind of look towards a first pass on community support.

because after the weekend, whether you join a team or not, you're part of the community of practice.

So that's gonna be kind of broadening from just teams to community.

So any facilitator, feel free to add something.

Otherwise, let's look at some of these comments that people are already adding to slide number 10.

So we'll start with the positive, the spoonful of sugar and whatnot, a spoonful of stevia.

openness and welcoming so that's two people and maybe we'll add kindness here so just showing up as humans and giving each other the benefit of the doubt and just being charitable in our interpretation and generous with our time and attention these are all really special things that i really agree also make it an amazing place so wonderful resonance

broad range of experiences.

So that's also fun.

You'll talk to somebody who's in a high pressure situation in their day job using feedback loops to model vital infrastructure and someone else is going to be hearing about feedback loops for the first time.

So that's a fun conversation and both sides learn and benefit.

Okay, so authenticity and spontaneity.

So just being like, yes, I am going to take my dog on a walk.

As Park said, the doge had to be walked.

That's real and it's spontaneous.

It comes up and life happens and the community has critical mass so that you can be authentic and spontaneous.

So all the time zones are there for you and your schedule can be what it is.

And maybe you can set it a year in advance and then something changes the day before the weekend.

So all of those are totally valid and it's important for people to authentically show up.

and not just feel like they have to be participating a certain way.

Let's look for a few more of these and then we'll kind of head to the middle and to the tensions and frictions.

So respectful discussion and curiosity and curiosity.

So curiosity is what allows the cat to live.

because that's us being curious about the ideas.

That's why we all love complexity.

Being curious about how we could apply complexity, asking questions.

I mean, I feel like a third of the sentences end with a question mark because we're asking a lot of questions and then we can always go,

We're not gonna finish this this weekend.

We're not gonna even finish it this week.

So how will we be able to work amidst that?

So that's kind of cool.

Okay, some Hotel California memes in the center.

You can check out anytime you want, but you can never leave.

make of that what you will as we head over to the tensions and frictions these are really important and very valuable pieces of feedback so I hope everybody feels that they can contribute to not just providing feedback but know that it is heard and recognized and that the organizers they look at the previous iteration of an event like whether it's a heartbeat or a weekend

And that goes into how they design and co-create the next iteration of that event.

So think of this as like just one day in an organism with a long lifespan.

So it's just the fourth online day of some organism.

Let's look at some of these though.

Well, any facilitators, is there one that like pops out to you on the tensions and frictions or something that like you resonated with or something that you feel like is, you saw an example of it this weekend or you have a thought about how to address that or ameliorate it?


SPEAKER_01:
I was just thinking about jargon and abbreviations.


SPEAKER_05:
Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
Sometimes people are very passionate about what they're doing and they don't really realize that we don't know what it is.

So maybe sometimes a short introduction to a subject is welcome.


SPEAKER_05:
Yes.

Great.

So jargon and abbreviations.

So anything that's an acronym or an inside joke,

just take a breath and maybe just explain it the straightforward way.

And yes, it will cost you a few extra syllables, but I think it'll be appreciated.

Okay.


SPEAKER_00:
And I'll add that, you know, it's just a lot of cross-cultural collaboration.

So jokes that'll work in one culture don't work in other cultures.

So if someone says something and you're like, whoa, that's not right.

Just,

Stop before you take offense and think about where they're coming from in that.

Because your team starts to become a very personal space.

And so I think when that happens, it's easier to get offended when things are said.

So just be aware.

And sometimes we do have to censor ourselves for the consideration of others.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks, Jessica.

So maybe one that we can connect it to.

There's definitely going to be many to connect to, but occasional oversharing.

So what might be oversharing for one person or feel that way might not be.

So that oversharing is constantly negotiated and negotiated.

reinterpreted because we are just meeting each other but like to be honest i really feel like close and like i could share something even though it's like i look down it's like we're live streaming but you know anything can come out when we speak so being very mindful of that and like some people might want to talk about

biosecurity in their region.

Other people might not.

Some people might wanna talk about the economy, other people might not.

So there's no topic that everybody is gonna wanna talk about.

And so oversharing is very nuanced and has a very high dimensionality.

And it's something where it's good to ask and take it slow and turn take,

and ask questions because a question can be prying, I guess, but it's rarely oversharing.

And even a question like, is it okay to talk about X?

That can be a helpful way instead of like, you know, that reminds me of X. Well, maybe that went down a branch that that person didn't want to go down.

So let's look at some of the time constraints.

So invisible undersharing, good counterpoint, pink post-it note poster, because invisible undersharing, I wonder what that could look like.

but it's totally a valid point.

And that's almost related to the jargon or the inside joke.

Like everybody has such a different complexity view that maybe what's, again, oversharing to one person is like, I know what an agent-based model is.

You don't have to tell me that it's based upon this and that.

But then also maybe some other people might,

assume that there is more knowledge and just kind of plow ahead.

Okay.

So let's talk about some of the temporal constraints and then some of the more situational ones.

So lack of sleep, lack of sleep, time constraints, too many jobs.

Well, some of the eternal challenges.

Jessica, what do you think about that?


SPEAKER_00:
We're all here because we're passionate about something, complexity.

And even something that you're passionate about and you love and is generally fun for you, if it starts feeling overwhelming and you're just like, oh my gosh, it becomes a chore.

First thing, check your sleep.

Usually it's because you just...

You're overworked a little bit.

And then it's OK to say no sometimes to your teammates.

I know we all want to get something done.

But again, we've talked about this.

Be open.

Be like, hey, I can't do that this week.

So that's my personal experience.

If I start to feel unpassionate about things that I love, like complexity, I realize I don't have enough sleep and I'm a little stretched too thin.


SPEAKER_05:
totally know what you mean so here i think we're always learning and improving like how can we have at the um lower levels of maslow's hierarchy of needs how can we communicate that it's really important to be healthy and not to um fit your health around

the sessions you want to go to alone like how do you kind of meet in the middle and have a healthy weekend experience because yeah there's only 72 hours or however long there is and so you know many of those hours should be sleeping we hope maybe some people stay up but I didn't the organizers didn't I know the facilitators didn't so how to um deal with that um and

Also, again, these are not things we're gonna resolve in the next few minutes, but we just really appreciate people raising these points and we wanna learn and iterate and improve.

So let's talk about some of these overlapping sessions.

Yeah, totally agree.

It's a trade-off because like, if we only did one session per hour, per every other hour, then there'd only be like 25 sessions

sessions total.

So each facilitator would only be able to give one session.

So it would be unlikely that any person would be able to maybe go to that session.

If we have multiple, it splits it up and they're overlapping, but that can also be fun to have a small session because we're not speakers at a conference.

Like if somebody wants to give a live stream and have it on the Complexity Weekend YouTube channel, we should totally do that.

We can just work at a time when you'll be able to broadcast

your idea in long format, however you want.

But the facilitated sessions are kind of smaller opportunities to have a high quality engagement and attention.

Okay, so knowledge gaps, age gaps, just like Jessica said earlier, like cultural contrasts, these are very real and we're always looking to ways to make this work.

One thought I have on this of all these kinds of gaps is like, these are the right problems and the right questions.

Like either we have age gaps and we have an intergenerational community and we all learn from each other and we make it better and bigger than the sum of the parts.

Or we say, well, it's only for this age.

So have we really solved that problem by just only focusing on a subset of ages or on a subset of knowledge bases?

So these are absolutely tensions and frictions, but they're not negatives.

They're just...

the right problems to be addressing.

And someone in the live chat wrote, props to Jessica.

We were in a conversation yesterday and she was gracious to let me step out and go to sleep.

So great, you know, in situ facilitation, just recognize like, are you a little tired?

Just message me on Keybase.

Let's just pick this up in the future.

Okay, then navigating exploration and discovery along with pressure for implementation.

So there's the exploring and the information and how much is out there.

And then while we don't require teams or even push people who don't want to be on teams to be on teams, we do want to make it clear that those who do want to find teams, whether start them or join them or participate in a Complexity Weekend community committee,

that is an option.

So it's a really important feedback from Yellow Post-it Note about how we balance the fun of exploration with it not being overwhelming.

And then that's even before layering in this whole idea of applying complexity.

Like we know that we could spend a whole lifetime just learning complexity.

there's not time to um just learn so let's look at something that somebody just posted okay so this looks like it's from um hute 2004 and blackstock 2008 so maslow's hierarchy of needs informed by blackfoot nation alta so i'll just show what they wrote have no um direct understanding here so they talk about some of the pyramid of maslow's hierarchy

and how that might be informed by a western perspective and how that might be related to a what they're calling a first nations perspective and how that has um there's probably a lot of things to see in this image but maybe self-actualization rather than being higher up in the pyramid is lower so thanks for sharing this i'll put that in the middle awesome

um great well let's um just look at the community support for those who are still you know deep in the live stream and just let anyone go to slide 11 and just add any kind of community support they can put their contact information or not

we'll just for a few minutes um chill here and then we'll end before the hour so that we can take a break before the next live sessions begin so community support um this is where we can see like um it's related to when we talked about collecting the group level strengths and kind of

addressing personal weaknesses this is embodied by this slide translation services how about from complexity ease into various natural languages and computer languages does that service exist

This is also just a reminder, you know, there's 15 or however many people watching live at this time, but it's rewatchable and you'll be able to jump back to this jam board for anybody who like wants to follow up on one of these post-it notes that they see or add more.

That's what's going to be cool about asynchronous work.

And also it's kind of the fun of complexity.

Like it's all happening at once.

When somebody buys a cup of coffee, there's something chemical happening.

There's something physiological happening, economic, social.

That's part of the challenge of complexity is that it opens us up to thinking about how interrelated systems are.

And then what do we do?

Well, at least one answer is just

be candid with what we're looking for in and from the community and then what we're looking to give to the community or individuals within the community.

I'll add one from the live stream slash organizers is we're always looking for feedback and for

Participation in committees.

Cool.

Our statistical analysis and Stella simulations.

I'm Jessica.

What is Stella?


SPEAKER_00:
Stella is a system dynamics modeling tool.

It's a drag and it's kind of drag and drop modeling with stocks and flows.

And it works the differential equations for you.

Now you have to be knowledgeable to know, you know, the, the other, the math of one input plus input equals output.

But it's a, it's when I use to model my system dynamics.


SPEAKER_05:
Cool.

What's so fun about these community support ones, and we'll navigate away, but just so many things could go in both.

Inspiration and encouragement.

know i'm sure there are those on both sides here and you're in the right place to intersect so i'll let people continue to work on the jam board again always return to it we're going to come back to it during each of the live streams but let's just close with little recap on the pssot and then we're going to head back into gather so

Just a reminder that the first page of the PSSOT has all the links that you'll need.

We were just in this stream looking through the organizer slides and the Jamboard.

The weekend live streams are at this playlist, which is public.

And then there's the pre-weekend video playlist, which we just ask people not to share outside the cohort.

However, in future cohorts with better and different communication to our facilitators, we might have some of that be public as well.

second tab is the weekend program so here we are in the second hour of the live stream and we can look forward to three sessions starting in just a few minutes with shirley michaela and edgar and then we're going to continue on with the rhythm for the next you know

20 hours or something like that, we're gonna have the even UTC live sessions by facilitators, then the odd UTC, the Gather office hours, unstructured time.

So this has concluded the middle live stream.

Thank you, Jessica.

And thank you to everybody who was part of this live stream.

We'll see you for the closing live stream.

We'll see you in Gather and on Keybase.

and just have fun during this middle part of the weekend.

And if you're looking for a team, I hope that this stream has provided you with information on the ways that that can happen and that you feel inspired and empowered and motivated to make that happen.

Any closing thoughts, Jessica?


SPEAKER_00:
Uh, I think it's just, you know, have fun.

Don't be afraid to, uh,

If something seems scary, it probably means you should dive in and try.

That's all I have to say.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you, Jessica.

You can depart the studio.

Goodbye.

Okay.

That's the end of the stream.

So everybody who is watching live, check out, and we will see you in Gathering Keybase.

Goodbye.