SPEAKER_00:
hello everyone welcome to the synergetics live stream this is synergetics live stream 3.0 it's january 19th 2021 i am daniel friedman and i'll be doing a solo stream i don't quite have the tooling yet for doing live chat but i'll try to um integrate any feedback that anyone has in youtube or any other platform comments i'll try to incorporate that for a future presentation

Today in Synergetics Livestream 3.0, we have quite the lineup.

The spirit or the intention for today is these three words, integration, stability, and plasticity.

So integration, because we're gonna be integrating a lot of ideas and Synergetics is really an integrative effort.

And then stability and plasticity, because in another project, Active Inference Lab, we were just learning about the big five personality traits and how those can be decomposed or superimposed to two higher order traits, which are stability and plasticity, referring to the characteristic of a cybernetic system to basically stay the same or change.

And so there are these two fundamental yin and yang or gas and brake.

It's like, how much are things changing and how much do they stay the same?

And of course, the more things change, the more they stay the same, but we can also separate that out sometimes.

Today in 3.0, we're gonna do our usual, which is go over some of the key memes and themes because it's a million coats of paints to really understand some of this concept.

Then we're going to look over at the things to integrate.

I took a few things off of things to integrate from previous times and added a couple new things.

And then we're going to be going through the text.

And in the text, when we go to a section, at least for now, what we do is we read the text verbatim because often Bucky and Applewhite meant it exactly as they phrased it.

Then reread the section with a little intermittent commentary, maybe contextualizing, maybe providing a definition.

And then close each little section with an example and some questions that arise.

So in 3.0, we are going to be talking about experientially founded mathematics.

So that's mathematics that's based upon experience rather than abstraction away from experience.

The second section will be about modelability.

In other words, what is a model?

How do we build a model?

Again, a lot of parallels with other philosophy of science questions that we're dealing with in other projects.

And then the last section, which should be pretty fun, is going to be about numerology and what are called indigs.

So if you've heard of numerology, but you don't know about Bucky's numerology, then you're going to learn something new.

And if you don't know about indigs, then you're also going to hopefully learn something new because this is kind of some classic Bucky.

And these aren't always things that people talk about when they're sharing his sculptures or talking about geodesic domes.

They don't always talk about the numerology and the indigs.

So let's get right into it in slide 90.

Okay, so we're gonna read, reread, give an example, and then look for a question.

So here is 201.00, starting with section one.

mathematics involved in synergetics consists of topology combined with vectorial geometry synergetics derives from experientially invoked mathematics experientially invoked mathematics shows how we may measure and coordinate omni rationally energetically arithmetically geometrically chemically volumetrically crystallographically vectorally topologically and energy quantum wise in terms of the tetrahedron

What a great starting line.

So this is going to be where Bucky is building a bridge between other and previous approaches to mathematics or other areas that are peripheral to mathematics, like control theory, perhaps, and looking at how we can bridge from those previous words and disciplines, really they're departments of a university, but we're in the university of life.

So we don't necessarily need to go by the disciplinary titles.

And so we're going to be

looking to bridge the previous ways.

Actually, I made a mistake.

I didn't go to the key memes and themes.

I was just so excited to jump right into the text.

So I'm actually gonna pull back, go to the key memes and themes, and then we'll return to the experiential mathematics.

So as we've talked about before,

Synergetics is relational and multi-scale thinking.

It's related to our connected and accessible experiences, which is why I was so excited to go to experiential mathematics.

In synergetics, there aren't infinitesimals.

There aren't things that are infinitely small, nor are there things that are infinitely large or stretch out into infinity.

There's no points, there's no lines and no planes because unless something encloses volume, it doesn't actually exist, which is fine.

It can be a concept, it's metaphysical, but existence is energy manifested in the real world.

In Synergetics, we see design as this anticipatory or cybernetic science.

We're looking to make design so that other people don't have to have certain issues that might surprise them.

For example, we might design to include a slope instead of a staircase in a certain situation because it could include more people in accessing the building or it might be useful under a variety of different circumstances.

So that's how design helps us preempt specific things by planning in general.

Like, I don't know exactly which tree I'm going to have to chop branches off, but I know that I'll need an axe.

Or I don't know exactly why I'm going to need a fire, but I know I'm going to need a lighter when I go camping.

And so that's the kind of thing that design says about planning.

Tensegrity is to synergetics, which is kind of both of those are bucky departments, as engineering is to physics.

So tensegrity is sort of the applied physical structural versions of tension and compression.

Synergetics is a level abstracted beyond that.

So it's kind of like you have the real building with a tension and the compression, and then you have the abstracted simulation or the mathematics or the equations, and those are not a physical building, but they might describe and predict and facilitate the design of really nice buildings.

So that's the relationship between tensegrity and synergetics.

It turns out that through the investigation of either end, either by stacking physical objects over in the tensegrity land or by thinking over in synergetics land, you'll find out that space has a shape.

It's not just anything goes.

It's not like you can pack spheres closely in any number of arrangements.

There's only a few arrangements that they fit into.

And it turns out that this structure is pattern, and that can be a static nesting, or it can be a dynamical relationship, especially in synergetics.

Last time, I believe we talked about how universe is the total scenario.

So scenario is just the setup, whatever the scene is, you know, begin scene, that's scenario.

Universe is the biggest one.

You don't need to say the universe because there's only universe.

Now, any system inside of universe is a subsystem.

The one system that can be said to be the biggest one is universe.

So there's no outside universe, but there is inside and outside system.

And in fact, insideness and outsideness is what defines system.

System has shape.

If it has inside and outside and it exists, it has to fill volume.

That means it's a tetrahedron.

Thinking 4D is pretty essential for synergetics and 4D has a bunch of different meanings.

Previously, I had talked about the tetrahedron with a 60 degree focus rather than the square with a 90 degree focus, or you could look at it in radians, you could use a different system.

there are other meanings of four dimensional or 4d and so here i've grabbed a slide from kirby earner and before i mention it i'm going to flip over to his youtube channel and as he put it ritually subscribe so i've just ritually subscribed to kirby earner who has such a fantastic channel

and is such a great communicator on synergetics and really motivating with how he's integrated computational experiences with synergetics understood as not a STEM field, but rather coming from this humanity side of CP Snow's Divide.

So check out Kirby's channel and I look forward to doing more things together maybe in the future.

The slide that I grabbed was this 4D, multiple definitions of 4D from Kirby.

And here we see 4D, polytopes, Coxeter, extended Euclideanism.

So in other words, we've talked about one-dimensional and two-dimensional, you know, XY plane on a piece of paper.

Okay, three-dimensional, maybe you still think about that in terms of XYZ, like a Cartesian coordinate system.

But what about four dimensions, four spatial dimensions?

What is that fourth dimension?

So that's extended Euclideanism.

You don't really have an easy way to put it,

within the current framework of Euclidean geometry, but you want to go to the fourth level.

And you don't just want that three plus one, X, Y, Z plus time.

Another definition of 4D actually is integrated to this 3 plus 1 equals 4 idea, which is relativity, which is related to Einstein, Minkowski spaces, and a few other ideas.

And in these framings, the tensor of x, y, z in time is understood to be a single coherent object.

So we have 4D unity in plurality through 3 plus 1.

And then the last definition of 4D that Kirby put up here, but again, these are just a few of them, is tetrahedron as minimal shape, RBF.

That's Bucky.

So these two definitions of 4D, either the extended geometrical sense or the relativistic sense with 3 plus 1 equals 4, had already been explored outside of synergetics.

Bucky introduced this idea of 4D as kind of like his signature.

And some of the 4Ds that he used were physical and some were energetic.

But the key one is 4D and the number four representing the tetrahedron.

You need those four vertices to make the minimal space enclosing shape.

That's the tetrahedron.

And so that is also like four separate things, but they equal one.

So there is this unity in four, whether you go one plus one plus one or three plus one, or you just...

appear with one and you can't go any lower than that pretty cool stuff so the things to integrate today as always we'll note the uh things that we want to go into in the future here and one thing that arose today when we're talking about indigs is this numerological history poem or prose it's pretty interesting and uh

I just, there were too many pages to go through it, and it's too much of a coherent piece to really break up into subsections.

So we're going to kind of pick up right at the end of the numerological history today, and then another day maybe look over the more like historical elements.

But let's finally return to slide 90, get back to experiential mathematics.

So we were just going through this one right here, which was about Bucky building a bridge from other fields of mathematics or perimathematics, building a bridge to synergetics.

So let's go through these different fields that are invoked.

The mathematics invoked in Synergetics consists of topology.

That's the study of how things are connected or network science or

various kinds of relational mapping areas, including the qualitative potential, like ecological psychology, combined with vectorial geometry.

So the vector is a key thing.

The vector is a line with a arrow on the end of it.

So it's a directed line.

That's one type of vector.

But Bucky starts building from the idea on that.

And remember from last time, there's no straight line.

So the vector isn't just the straight line, et cetera.

But it involves what...

are called vectors outside of synergetics synergetics derives from experientially invoked mathematics so in other words it's about the instantaneous appeal it's not about someone else thought about it it's not an appeal to authority it's not an ad hominem this is about the experience of invoking understanding in mathematics in an individual so it's always perspectival

Experientially invoked mathematics shows how we may measure and coordinate.

So in other words, infer and act, action and inference.

Omni-rationally.

So that means rationally in all directions or senses.

Leave it up to each individual what that means because we're all rational in a way.

Energetically.

So how can we act and infer on energy?

Arithmetic, so that's gonna be using numbers and addition.

Could we add two things together that are outside the scope of adding?

Like, could we add a party of 10 people to another party of 10 people?

Well, not quite like two plus two, but maybe there might be a way to do it.

Geometrically is about shape.

chemically is about chemistry volumetrically in terms of volume again coming back to this idea of volume being the fundamental not surface area or edge or pointness we're going to start with and enter into geometry from volumes so we're not going to enter into okay lesson one the point and then everything is built up of points

We're going to start with Lesson 1, the tetrahedron.

It's a volume.

It's space-enclosing.

And there's all kinds of small things that might be nested within it, or it might be a volume like a speck of dust that's so small it looks like a point, but it's still a tetrahedron.

It's still space.

Crystals are really important for synergetics, and Arthur Loeb, who was one of the transmitters of synergetics, did a lot of interesting work on crystallography.

Here's vectorially, again, so vectors, got it, Bucky.

Topologically, again, and energy, quantum, and this comes up in a few different places in terms of the tetrahedron.

it's kind of like this strange loop where there's this embedding and there's this nesting within the sentence within the section across the book across different books getting back to the same key points that's what the thousand coats of paint is to me it's always going to be coming back to geometry the tetrahedron volume there's really nothing else to return to these are our strange attractors that's what makes synergetics awesome

One example of this would be, how about doing a simulation of a cell?

How could we look at all these different attributes of cells, like their surface tension, the cellular geometry, information geometry, control theory of the cell?

How could we integrate these things going all the way down to the crystallography of the protein into a coherent...

sense-making apparatus for interfacing with bacteria, for example.

And a question I would have would be, how do these other fields feel about being included in this 201.01 section?

Two, since the measurement of light's relative swiftness, which is far from instantaneous, the classical concepts of instant universe and the mathematician's instant lines have become both inadequate and invalid for inclusion in synergetics.

So it was not long before

before Bucky was writing in the 1900s when it was understood exactly what the speed of light was perhaps people had debated whether it was instantaneous or not but once it was actually nailed down to being around the speed it is which is very far from instantaneous um

That led to a revolution in physics because the idea of an instant universe disappeared.

So let's think back to Kirby's 4Ds.

So the first 4D was the extended geometry.

And so that doesn't have time at all.

The fourth dimension is like a spatial one.

And so it turns out that in that universe, which is happening all at once, it could work.

It could hypothetically work in some, again, alternate reality, not universe that we know.

when we measured light and found out that it wasn't instantaneous over all timescales.

It might be instantaneous during a conversation that you're having, but it's not instantaneous between the sun and the earth.

So that made this instant universe falsified.

And that was the transition to the three plus one, where time is this special dimension.

And it turns out that that time as a special dimension, which is accepted by relativity, actually goes even deeper than that.

Bucky's saying that because light, the fastest thing,

in the scientist's understanding because light is the fastest thing.

Mathematicians' instant lines or lines all at once might be useful heuristics.

However, they're not grounded in experience.

They're not grounded in watching the lightning and the thunder come to you at two different times through two different senses when you know that they're from a single event.

So instantaneous things are not included in synergetics because we know that there's no true instanti-ity, but there might be things that happen very rapidly over a short distance of time, but that doesn't make them instantaneous.

And so we're gonna cast out all kinds of instantaneous models from synergetics.

An example of this, again, is the lightning strike where you see the light and then you hear the sound later, but they're from the same expanding energy event.

And we can tell by the differential that light is traveling at a different speed than sound.

So that's why we need to have a universe that's always happening locally all at once, yet is integrated globally through these expanding energy spheres.

And the question I would have would be, how do we deal with the interaction or the intersection of different energy spheres?

Synergetics makes possible a rational, whole number, low integer quantation of all the important geometries of experience.

because the tetrahedron, the octahedron, the rhombic dodecahedron, the cube, and the vector equilibrium embrace and compromise all the lattices of all atoms.

Big claims.

Synergetics makes possible a rational, so in other words, it has a local sense to it, whole number, so we're not gonna get any 1.5, we're not gonna get root two over two, we're not gonna get three pi over four, we're gonna get one, two, three, four, and those whole numbers are gonna be low.

It turns out in the numerology section, there are some high numbered integers and there's never non-integers, but the most key pieces of synergetics are related to one, two, three, four, and a couple of other low numbers.

Quantation means quantification of all, but kind of like documentation in this sense.

We're not putting a quantifiable number per se, but we are classifying all of the important geometries.

Geometries of what?

Well, of experience.

If you were going to classify all the shapes that could fill space,

or all the shapes that have a certain characteristic, like 12 sides.

you could characterize or quantate those geometries.

Now we're working with this idea that space has a shape and that experience has a shape.

And so the idea of the shape is going to be reflected by some shapes in the real world, just like some conceptual models that we have show analogs in the real world, but we're going beyond tensegrity and synergetics to thinking about what these geometries of experience and thought really are.

This is because the tetrahedron and these other shapes, the vector equilibrium, by the way, is a single point with 12 equally splayed out balanced unit length vectors.

That's the vector equilibrium.

There's six pulling and six pushing, so it's balanced.

these shapes embrace and compromise all the lattices of all the atoms so he's suggesting that because these are the minimal core set of basically minimal shapes in their own unique way and in other sections it's explained how each of these are unique in their own minimal way and basically they exhaustively characterize these motifs of experience

because those motifs of experience are motifs of space and how space is filled by shape, mental space, physical space.

So an example would be a relationship.

It might be one person's understanding of themself and somebody else, and then two friends or society and parents or two different parents.

and that's um social synergetics and that really relates me to my question which is how do we go from this list of shapes which might be related to the geometry of molecules into social synergetics or designing for accessibility

Section 10, accommodations of proclivities, phases, and disciplines.

So this is like transdisciplinarity or interdisciplinarity by another word, but it's gonna be phrased not in a academic way, as in academic being academia, like the different departments of academia, it's gonna be phrased in terms of binaries that are transcended.

So let's see how that happens.

11.

The tetrahedral and vector equilibrium models in the isotropic vector matrix provide an absolute accommodation network of energy articulation, including the differentiated proclivities of

So let's reread.

The tetrahedral and vector equilibrium models.

So these are two, actually three, in the isotropic vector matrix.

So the isotropic vector matrix is like this infinite field that spills out with all of these vector possibilities.

So it's a space filler for sure.

And that's why it's called the isotropic vector matrix.

Now, the isotropic vector matrix

can be sub-realized into the tetrahedron and the vector equilibrium, which are coextant space fillers.

Neither tetrahedra nor VE, if I'm recalling correctly, fill space alone, but together they're able to compose shapes that do fill space.

And so space filling and all space filling is so important for synergetics.

So we're gonna be using this isotropic vector matrix framework as like, instead of a graph paper, we're gonna be using this IVM framework.

And in this IVM framework, there are these two pieces, kind of like the proton and the neutron that we talked about last time, but these two shapes that mutually coexist, mutually always in every single place,

And these two shapes are what give us this differentiated proclivity.

And also the IVM is considered an absolute accommodation network of energy articulation.

So that's like networks of energy and how we talked about it in another conversation, not on a live stream, but about how local energy paths are culminated in the geodesic.

And it turns out that these differentiated proclivities, so these two different tendencies, are going to be like two ends of a spectrum that are part of this absolute accommodation network of energy articulation.

So it's going to be like you have this energy articulation possibility, and then that, depending on whether it's going to the tetrahedral side or the vector equilibrium side, it's going to be manifest as one of these adjectives in the pair or the other.

So let's just go through them.

associative disassociative convergent divergent oscillating pulsing dynamic kinetic energetic synergetic entropic syntropic expansive contractive explosive implosive so out and in gravitational radiational in and out hydraulic pneumatic importing exporting

Inside, outing, outside, inning.

So which side of the Markov blanket are you crossing?

Involuting, evoluting.

So evolution, and then what is the opposite?

What is the obverse of evolution?

That's involution.

Omnidirectional, focal.

Going outwards versus going inwards.

Push, pulling, of course.

Radial, circumferential.

So from the center of the circle to the edge or around the edge.

rotational, ovational gearing, synchronous, dysynchronous, asynchronous as we might call it now,

Torque, counter-torque, so action and reaction.

Turbining, counter-turbining, and vector, tensor.

So there's a few different kinds of metaphors that are being applied.

And not to go too much into reading the text, but it seems like torque and counter-torque are related in a way that's a little bit more obviously plus and minus, as opposed to vector and tensor, which is really more like the relationship of a...

energy vector being generalized into a broader space so there's a lot of different relationships and it's kind of like the opposites test that they provide to children sometimes so somebody would say in and then the child can say out so here it's like what's the ev what's the opposite of evolution what's the opposite of push and pull and so this idea of transcending dualities transcending binaries through broader synergetics umbrellas is really one of the key ideas

So how are we going to get these differentiated proclivities?

That is going to occur together with the integrated synergetic proclivities.

So now these are the binaries, so to speak, the extremes, the spectrums that are integrated in synergetics.

So this was like lower level spectra, and these are higher order spectra.

these proclivities are inward outward three-way aroundedness precessional processing of plus minus polarization and wave propagation mechanics so these are things that don't intrinsically have duality or they could like inwards outwards or wave propagation but now we're seeing them at a level above so the previous level it was kind of like up and down in and out you know rise and fall

But now we're thinking, okay, wave propagation mechanics is something that subsumes, for example, amplification and diminution or dynamical systems.

So these are the binaries that are to be transcended in the first step.

This is the pre-relationship of synergetics.

What do we do when we have a synergetic system?

Well, it's not just that we have inside outing and outside inning crossing a membrane.

Now we have inward and outward.

We have relational experience, perspective.

we also have around because we have perspective so that's pretty cool it's like synergetics is transcending only to find new sets of paradoxes this is occurring together with inter transformative behavioral phases of

incandescent, liquid, plasmic, thermal, and vapor.

So this is like the phase diagrams that maybe you heard about in chemistry class, solid, liquid, gas, plasma, but it's being expanded to include perhaps other kinds of phases that we don't know about.

And also it was so exciting for me to learn in chemistry that there wasn't just one ice.

There wasn't just one water ice.

Different chemicals froze differently.

That kind of makes sense.

Their structures are different.

there's not just one water ice there's so many different kinds with very slightly different geometries so that's pretty fascinating and then here's where bucky does make his appeal to transdisciplinary thinking he says and the the measure mensurability is the measurabilities elucidating the disciplines of so these are the disciplines of academia or of research or keywords wikipedia pages that synergetics is going to subsume and of course it's only a partial list

And those are gonna be biological, chemical, cryogenic, crystallographic, electrical, genetic, geodesic, geodetic, geological, geometrical, logical, mathematical, mechanical, non-biological, structuring, physiological, scientific, teleologic, thermodynamic,

and viral virological so pretty interesting it's a alphabetical list but you could have just said biological and non-biological wouldn't that have covered it all bucky but no we get so many more examples so that's what's so special and pretty interesting virological i know that's one of kirby's interest and many others

And that whole massive clause, all of these differentiated proclivities that are transcended only to reach higher order proclivities that are going to be moving through these inter-transformative different phases, and that's gonna be subsuming all these different disciplines.

It turns out that is gonna be just so that we can explore comprehensive, rational, interrelated number constants.

So great, that's what we're gonna be doing.

And this is not included today.

So let's go back home.

But that was the first part on experientially founded mathematics, which is we're going to have a mathematics that we experience.

It's going to be tangible.

It's going to be comprehensible, graspable.

It's going to be at hand.

It's going to be for everyone to be included in.

And that's experiential founded mathematics.

Let's go to the next part of the text, which is going to be Synergetics 900 Modelability on slide 808.

Here we go, modelability.

And the images we see on the top are two examples of a four-part system.

So we should know, or at least suspect by now, that these four-part systems with the four vertices and the six edges, those are the minimal space enclosing systems, ergo they're the minimal reference system.

If you can't talk about four, you're not talking about a thing yet.

So include other things until you get to four.

So you say, no, no, I just wanna talk about this water cup.

Okay, well, there's the water cup, there's the water in the cup, there's my hand, and then there's me wanting to drink water.

All right, we're up to four.

Now we can start thinking about how each of these pieces are related.

How is my desire to have water related to my hand or related to the water in the cup?

So just by starting with one object, we can decompose it into different sets of four.

So here we go with modelability.

And also this is a tetrahedron.

And so that's the way that we've talked about it, but this is kind of on a flat lay.

I learned that one from Sasha.

It's a flat lay of a tetrahedron.

The four vertices are laid out, might be like you would see it in cytoscape or a network science visualization.

It's like flattening that tetrahedra just so that you can see all of the edges in planar form.

And so when we're talking about tetrahedra, we don't just mean the ones that are sharp and look like little crystals.

We're also talking about any motif of four, like on a social network or on a financial network.

So that's modelability.

Modelability is topologically conceptual in generalized principle independent of size and time.

Ergo, conceptual modelability is metaphysical.

So, rereading.

Modelability is topologically conceptual.

So it's based upon relatedness of things, that's topology, and it's conceptual.

It's the relatedness of ideas.

So you could say a car is topologically physical.

It's about how different pieces of metal are connected to each other.

And so we're going to say modelability is topologically conceptual.

So it's related to how things are connected, like parameters in a model.

And this topologically conceptual modelability is in generalized principle, independent of size and time.

Now you could have size or time in your model as a variable, but that's not actually size and time, that's still conceptual.

And this means that conceptually, the modelability is metaphysical.

So you can have a three-part model.

You can have a triangular model, so to speak, or the idea of the optimum possible triangle or the minimal triangle, but that doesn't make it physical.

Now, it's really an interesting debate, kind of like the representation wars.

If it's instantiated through thought, is that physical?

Is that a physical instantiation?

Or where does the synergetics of thought intersect with the geometry, physical geometry or the information geometry of the brain and of the extended cognitive apparatus?

Those are really important.

Reconnections.

This is going to be pretty fun.

Probably is not going to work, but that's fine.

Let me unplug something and plug it back in.

oh you know every time we try to do this it's a new little test but i'm just going to continue with it as it is and then i'll maybe record it to um upload the version to youtube so let's just continue with where we are conceptual formation conceptual formation is inherently empirical

and as such is always special case, sizing and always discloses all the physical characteristics of existence in time.

All right, let's just take a breath and return to the material.

Conceptual formation, so that means the formation of concepts is inherently empirical

which means it's based upon evidence and experience, and as such is always special case.

So anything that's going to be specifically special case, we know that we're going to need to have a physical instantiation of it.

So it's going to be empirical.

That means it's going to be physical.

So it's going to be related to metaphysical ideation, but it isn't the physical thing itself.

That means that because it's not metaphysical, it does include things like sizing and always discloses all the physical characteristics of existence in time.

I'm gonna just give one more shot to reconnect here and hopefully this should work with the internet.

That would be pretty fun.

Let's think about an example or a question here.

Yeah, let's see what happens with the internet.

Will we re-zoom the stream?

It's too early to say, but we hope that we did it.

We might have done it.

Again, it's too early to say.

um a question uh okay is uh sizing and always discloses all the physical characteristics of existence in time so that looks like it didn't quite capture i'm still recording it still should be live streaming sorry about this for those who are listening because it's just a little bit you know trying to i'm gonna just stop and restart streaming up maybe we're back live all right

I think we're back live.

So sorry about that delay.

Yep.

We're back live.

Okay.

We did a live fix.

We totally did it live.

And we're going to continue on section 20.

So sorry about that delay.

I know it's not optimal, but c'est la vie.

Oh, it's funny.

I can see it.

It's on a total lag.

So there's going to be this lag period, but it's all good.

Thanks for bearing with me.

Section 20.

synergetics is a book about models humanly conceptual models lucidly conceptual models primitively simple models rationally inter-transforming models and the primitively simple numbers uniquely and holistically identifying those models and their inter-transformative generalized and special case number value accountings all right we're totally back live thanks everyone for bearing with it

let's break down this phrase before we get back in the flow so synergetics is a book didn't know about that about models so it says it right there synergetics is going to be about modeling so this is a key section that's why it's related to tetrahedra and all these other key ideas what kinds of models are we interested in

humanly conceptual models that should be basically all of them that's the ones that we can think about lucidly conceptual models maybe these are models that go beyond or um just human understanding so not just humanly conceptual models like building the titanic but lucidly conceptual models like the difference between same and different which has been shown that many animals are able to differentiate same versus different so you can train them on

cards or on different colors of ball and they'll learn to distinguish sameness versus differentness so that's an example of a model or of an idea that's metaphysical it's independent of the metaphysical or of the physical substrate but it's entailed by the physical substrate in the empirical example and so any specific sameness or differentness differentiation is going to be special case based upon size and place and all these other things however the idea is metaphysical

Primitively simple models might be the very axiomatic models like arithmetic and geometry.

Rationally inter-transforming models are the kinds of models that have a governed transition between multiple forms, two or more forms, and there's this rationality into the way that those forms transmogrify.

The primitively simple numbers uniquely and holistically identify these models and their inter-transformative generalized and special case number value accountings.

So we're going to be using these very low simple integers to uniquely and holistically identify models.

So just like we use the integers to uniquely and holistically identify shapes, for example, you can say three, four, five sided shape, and someone could say, okay, triangle, square, pentagon.

and it wasn't entailed that you had to have a certain angle when you just said the number five but because you're talking about the shape of space which is a specific thing just saying five sides it's an equilateral shape somebody can reconstruct a pentagon and those are always going to be realized in special case accountings so model versus form model is generalization form is special case

Model is generalization, form is special case.

This is what we've been talking about.

Model is metaphysics, is generalization, form is realization, is special case.

So form and function is its own duality in the physical, and form and function are encompassed by the model versus form dialectic.

An example of this might be the difference between a model of a car and then its realized form, or the model of a society and its realized special case form.

A question I would have is how do we go from model to form?

The brain in its coordination of the sensing of each special case experience apprehends forms.

Forms are special case.

Models are generalizations of interrelationships.

Models are inherently systemic.

Forms are special case systems.

mind can conceptualize models brains can apprehend forms so this is a little bit of a take on the mind brain duality and we're mapping mind and brain to model and physical form so the brain is that coordinator between mind and body as well as spirit and it's not just about the brain it's about the body and about the extended cognitive phenotype but that's what bucky means with brain

It means us, the brain in its coordination of the sensing of each special case.

So each sound, each lightning strike apprehends forms.

So whether it's a form of photons on your retina or it's a form of air in your eardrum, that's a special case, specific realization of a specific energy event, a lightning strike.

Models are generalizations of these interrelationships.

So if I make a model of a lightning strike, then I can say, well, here's my model of how light and sound travel at different speeds, and that's my model of lightning.

And that's above any specific form of lightning because it's a model.

Models are inherently systemic.

So models are inherently systemic because they must generalize across form.

form our special case systems because they can only be what they are.

Mind can conceptualize models, brains can apprehend forms.

So there's the division of labor between mind and brain, between models and forms.

Forms have size, models are sizeless, representing conceptuality independent of size.

Forms have size, models are sizeless, representing conceptuality independent of size.

repetition within the same sentence repetition within the same page in the same book within the same life detecting a theme and we won't go into the triangle part yet so that was modelability again kind of sorry that that section got a little hurt by the internet let's go to numerology and indigs section 1200.

Okay, so we're going to read these last little two pages of the history because they're actually related to this idea of modeling that we were just describing.

So this is one place to pick up on in the numerology story, but we're going to go back through the history of numerology earlier on another day.

So, and I won't break down these.

I'll just read straight through them until we get to the section on indigs.

So Bucky writes...

when in the mid 19th century physicists abandoned the concept of models we have seen that there are unique or cardinal names for the concepts 1 through 12 in england and germany and for the concepts 1 through 16 in france but that after they simply repeat in whatever congruence modulos they happen to be working the arabic numerals as well as their names are unique and stand alone only from 0 through 9

However, 11 is the result of two ones, 11, and 12 is similarly fashioned from two previously given symbols, namely one and two, 12.

But certain numbers such as prime numbers have their own cosmic integrity and therefore ought to be integrally expressed

What the numerologist does is to add numerals horizontally until they are all consolidated into one integer.

Numerologists have also assigned to the letters of the alphabet corresponding numbers.

A is 1, B is 2, C is 3, etc.

Numerologists wishfully assume that they can identify characteristics of people by the residual integer derived from integrating all of the integers, which integers they speak of as digits, identifying with the fingers of their hand, that is, their fingers, corresponding to all the letters in the individual's complete set of names.

Numerologists do not pretend to be scientific, they are just fascinated with correspondence of their key digits with various happenstances of existence.

They have great fun identifying events and things and assuming significant insights, which from time to time seem well justified.

But what games numerologists chose to play with these tools may or may not have been significant.

Possibly by coincidence, however, and possibly because of number integrity itself, some of the integer integrating results are found to correspond elegantly with experimentally proven physical laws, and have subsequently proven to be infinitely reliable.

Half a century ago, I became interested in seeing how numerologists played their games.

i found myself increasingly intrigued and continually integrating digits what a nice bucky poem just to sort of briefly recap a couple things here this part about the numbers 1 through 12 being unique ideas ergo reflected by unique words it's related to language so i wonder in other languages in other cultures which sets of words have unique names so usually 1 through 10 are different i don't know if there's a language where there's a number um

like three and two are the same word or something like that.

But there's other cultures where it goes up to 16 and Bucky is taking that into the next level saying, okay, so after you got those 16 or the 12 unique words, whatever your language is, you're basically just working on combinations of those unique 12 words.

So let's just cut down to just those.

All right, now let's look at those last few guys in line there.

You got zero through nine.

Those are unique and standalone.

Those are the Arabic numerals.

However,

you can also have unique words for 11 12 13 etc but you don't really need those because you're kind of reducing to using math so some people might have just said numbers allow us to simplify systems of number

a way that language doesn't but bucky had to go there and write this whole poem to really clarify it so then he's going to speak of two kinds of cosmic integrities there's going to be the prime numbers which apparently have their own cosmic integrity their own cosmic dignity and therefore they ought to be integrally expressed

so in other words the prime numbers are special and maybe they should just be their own idea because you can't really break down the 17 into the 1 and the 7. it doesn't really fold out that way so prime numbers have their own cosmic integrity especially the low prime numbers

Then for all the rest of the numbers, all the big numbers, remember there's no non-integer numbers.

So you don't have to worry about any fractions or irrationality.

But for the integers that aren't prime numbers, you just add the digits across.

So that's the simplest numerology or gematria is just to add the numbers across and keep on crunching until you get a single digit number.

And digit, he reminds us here is related to our hand.

It's our embodiment.

Now, he notes, numerologists do not pretend to be scientific.

They're just fascinated.

But Bucky is saying, and he closes so humbly with only a four couple lines on his own research in this area, basically saying, sometimes they come up with good stuff.

So what is the good stuff?

Let's just look at these a little bit.

We'll just look at indigs because I mentioned it in the beginning.

And so perhaps people have heard of adding across the digits.

of combining the digits from different numbers, just adding as he dictated.

But let's go deeper into that integrity idea.

So section 1220 index, 1220.10, definition.

All numbers have their own integrity.

So every number has an integrity.

Every integer, every number has its own integrity.

We just talked about that.

It's either a prime number, especially a low prime, or you're going to do numerology to get it to some other number, to a simpler number.

Dot 11, the name digit comes from finger.

A finger is a digit.

There are five fingers on each hand.

Two sets of five digits give humans a propensity for counting in increments of 10.

So this is where it's gonna start to get really interesting because it's gonna be combining ideas from numerology, but also ideas from really embodied psychology and all kinds of other esoterica.

So just super fun.

And it is interesting, digit does relate to our finger.

These are our 10 digits and there's five on each hand.

And so we do have 10 fingers and we have 10 toes.

And there's some systems that are based upon counting to 20 and others are counting to 10.

It makes me wonder if there's any language that has unique words above 20 or counting above 20.

We're going to get to the endings in a second.

Curiosity and practical necessity have brought humans to deal with numbers larger than any familiar quantity, immediately available with which to make matching comparison.

This frequent occurrence induced brain plus mind capabilities to inaugurate ingenious human information apprehending mathematical stratagems in pure principle.

If you are looking at all the pebbles on the beach or all the grains of sand, you have no spontaneous way of immediately quantifying such an experience with discrete number magnitude.

Quantitative comprehension requires an integrative strategy with which to reduce methodologically large unknown numbers to known numbers by use of obviously well-known and spontaneous employed linear area, volume, and time measuring tools.

This is really awesome, so I'm excited to talk about it.

Curiosity and practical necessity have brought humans to dealing with large numbers.

So whether it's the amount of Satoshi in a Bitcoin or the number of grains of sand in the sea, sometimes you want to be dealing with numbers that are larger than just your nuclear family, larger than just you can count.

So one, two, three, many, or however many.

And this happened all the time.

Apparently, I believe it did, and it still does.

Now that is going to induce brain plus mind capabilities.

So that's like niche construction.

That's like the mind modifying the brain and vice versa.

Not to go too deep down the dualism rabbit hole right now, but it's like the two broad senses of brain and mind that we talked about earlier are now coming into play to co-navigate humans.

And what is it going to co-navigate them to do?

Apprehend information better by having mathematical stratagems in pure principle.

what could that mean if you're looking at all the pebbles on the beach you want to estimate it and so you don't have any way to just say okay well you know three plus three there's six grains of sand it's like thousands or millions or how many who knows this is like a fermi estimation problem which we love in complexity because it's a way of breaking down large estimates into smaller numbers and they're integer numbers by the way even though fractions could come into play

So this is an integrative strategy with which to reduce methodologically large unknown numbers to known numbers by the use of well-known and spontaneously employed tools.

For example, how many neurons are in the brain?

You might say, okay, well, there's two halves of the brain.

And so the first thing I'm going to do is just try to estimate how many neurons are in one half of the brain and then multiply that by two under the assumption that there's the same number across both sides.

So we're going to kind of use these low-numbered integers to break things up into more separable, more estimatable experiences.

And so those are going to be sort of spontaneously employed as we need them, and we're going to return to them.

So this is INDIG table A, comparative table of modular congruences of cardinal numbers.

This is a comparative table of the modular congruences of cardinal number systems expressed in Arabic numerals with the individual integer symbols integrated as INDIGs.

which discloses synergetic wave-module behaviors inherent in nature's a priori orderly integrative effects of progressive powers of interactions of numbers.

So this is what the indigs look like graphically.

And I'm going to return back to the table.

But basically you start with one and you get two.

So Bucky doesn't even dignify them with a point or line because they're not points or lines.

They're still physical things.

They're just not quite in shape yet.

Equilateral triangle.

This is an equilateral triangle layout of little things.

So not just dots.

That's why it's kind of a little kind of blip.

you have triangles, squares, and all these different groupings.

Now, once you get to five, you can look at it in a pentagon.

You get to six, you have it in an equilateral hexagon.

Now, once you get to seven, the seven shape, the septagon, to many people, not universal truth, but it looks a little irregular.

It's a little bit harder to draw than any of these top six things.

And so that necessitates breaking down into a triangle and a square for seven.

So seven is...

4 plus 3.

That takes us to 8.

4 plus 4.


UNKNOWN:
9.


SPEAKER_00:
4 plus 5.

And then 10.

5 plus 5.

Then 5 plus 6.

And then you get to 12.

Two hexagons.

And then once you get one more, 13, you break down one of the hexagons into other shapes and you start going off to the races that way.

So let's look through this table.

visual number one is its own non-integrated digit and therefore its indig is also one so the visual number 11 so like 5 plus 6 that number 11 you can think of as being looking like

looks like an 11 when you type it on the computer.

And that gets collapsed with one plus one into two.

And so what Bucky is finding is that as you make these numbers that are counting from one through 10,

So two is like one plus one, but it's also like an 11.

Visually, it's an 11, but non-integrated, it's like one plus one.

So this middle column is adding up.

One, two, three, four, five, six, seven.

The left-hand column is separating out how you experientially would identify that number if there was a bunch of goats running around.

It's like, there's six goats.

Really quickly, you might scan, okay, three, three, got it, there's six.

you probably wouldn't do, okay, there's four goats and two goats.

Maybe if they were in that arrangement, you might see it that way.

But six, the most natural distinction that we're going to draw is just you separate it out, it's three and three.

And so that's, again, reflected by these shapes.

Man started counting large numbers which he did not recognize as a discrete and frequently experienced pattern by modularly rhythmic repetitive measuring or matching with discrete patterns which he did recognize as, for example, by matching the items to be counted one for one with the successive fingers of his two hands.

This gave him the number of separate items being considered.

Heel to toe stepping off of the number or foot after foot length dimensions, or progressively and methodically covering areas with square woven floor mats of standard sizes as the Japanese tatami and subo,

or by successive mouthfuls or handfuls or bowls full counted on the fingers of his hand and then in multiples of hands gave him commonly satisfactory volume measurements so we're starting with this idea of adding one plus one plus one plus one so how are you going to feed a hundred people well if you know that each person needs one bowl you could just take one bowl and scale it up 100 fold

And so we can use these hand multipliers, which is a multiple of 10.

That's like multiplying by perception to give us a way to talk about volume across scale.

And so it's so cool also that even in his examples, they have to do with counting discrete entities and filling space.

So it's not going to be an abstract example.

It's going to be real examples.

Most readily, humans recognize and trusted one and one making two, or one and two making three, or two and two making four.

Oh, Bucky, come to 2021.

But an unbounded loose set of 10 irregular and dissimilar somethings was not recognizable by numbers in one glance.

It was a lot.

Nor are five loose, irregular, and dissimilar somethings recognizable in one glance as a number.

They are a bunch.

But a human hand is boundaried and finitely recognizable at a single glance as a hand, but not as a discrete number except by repetitively acquired confirmation and reflective conditioning.

Five is more recognizable as four fingers or a thumb, or even more readily recognizable as two end fingers, the two fingers in the middle, and the thumb.

Two plus two plus one equals five.

So there's many ways that we can break down these numbers.

And so just because it's in this image with a five in a pentagon, that might be experientially realized as two plus two plus one.

So this is taking experiential mathematics to just the most incredible level, which is reordering the number system and breaking down numbers into how we would count goats or how we would do a Fermi estimation problem.

So it's like, what are these numbers here?

Well, they're kind of based upon the generalization of adding one plus one plus one.

1,000 feet, you know, one foot.

Imperial measurement system, one foot.

And so we're gonna scale it to 1,000, and then we're just gonna call 1,000, one.

It's 1,000.

What is 1,000?

Well, it's 10 times 10 times 10.

But one of those is 1,000 feet.

And then one mile is 5,280 feet.

And so that's one mile.

That allows us to take that one plus one plus one local incrementalism and then put that into this scalable multi-scale context of the Fermi estimation.

Point 16, symmetrical arrays of identically shaped and sized integrally symmetrical objects evoke spontaneous number identification from one to six, but not beyond.

Paired sets of identities to six are also spontaneously recognized, hence we have dice and dominoes.

So again, really fun.

He's suggesting that for numbers that are one through six, if it were just flashed on the screen, you could detect the shape instantly and tell how many pieces were in it.

But once you get to seven or beyond, if the screen just flashed the shape, it might not be as easy to very quickly comprehend or grasp the shape all at once.

And so Bucky's taking that so seriously that again, we're breaking down numbers that are bigger than six because we just can't grasp larger than five at once.

We only have five fingers and even the five is really two plus two plus one or two plus three or four plus one.

And then, as another example of confirmation, we see that in dice and in dominoes, there's 0 through 6 or 1 through 6 pips on each little side.

But there's not something where you have to really quickly recognize if it's larger.

And so when playing a game like Stratego, where there's numbers 1 through 10, or 2 through 10 maybe, and some other rules, that's why we use the letters.

And then...

there's um games where you might have a card like a playing card and then in that case it has the number of hearts or spades or diamonds and the number so the symbol so that you can see exactly what it is and look at it oh okay 10. because it turns out it's really hard to break down the 10 and visually instantaneously recognize that it's 10.

But if there were a way to break down 10 visually, it'd be five and five or six and four.

And then if there were to be five and five, it would be the top one and the middle three and the bottom one.

And so we'd be right back to this kind of in-dig number crunching, quite literally number crunching.

That's just a little bit of Bucky's synergetics.

He takes it to a whole nother level with this waveform adding up and subtracting and rising and falling phases of the number line.

But that's basically it for today.

So let's return to home.

let's just see how we did today so we had a unfortunate internet event but c'est la vie we did hopefully come from a place of integration and stability though not of the internet and plasticity and we

made a brief error in the beginning, but did return to the key memes and themes and the things to integrate.

We then went through the text and hopefully brought up some interesting points related to mathematics, modelability, and numerology and indigs.

key memes and themes were reflected, I hope.

And in the future, I want to be able to do more numerological history and also just get a little bit more back to the shapes and the triangles and the relationships between different shapes.

So this has been definitely an interesting recording.

it's our third one so our next one will be our fourth and tetrahedral recording so that will be pretty fun but um yeah it's been great i hope everybody enjoyed listening to it and post a comment or come find me if you have any questions i want to incorporate feedback want to incorporate other people's perspective so if you want to share a story about bucky give a presentation join a dialogue

Performance art, I don't know.

Let's make this space something where people can get excited about synergetics and where we can put our highest vision forward for what synergetics could be and what it really is.

So thanks again, everybody, for watching, and I'll see you later.