SPEAKER_00:
Hello everyone, thanks for joining the Complexity Weekend, February 2022 heartbeat.

We're going to get started with the organizer and facilitator introduction in about 18 minutes, so for now, enjoy some of the tunes of Michael Garfield, and see you soon.


UNKNOWN:
Oh.

so

Thank you.

¶

Thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Hey everyone.

So welcome to the February 22 heartbeat.

I opened OBS before gather, so I won't have my video, but I'm here.

Thanks Steven and Yana for joining.

How goes it?

Either of you two.


SPEAKER_03:
Good.

Good.

Can you hear me?

Okay.

Yep.

Let me just check which, which might, is it this mic or that's fine.

That's fine.

That's fine.

That's good.

Okay.

I'll use that one.


SPEAKER_00:
um cool well welcome whatever time it is um we'll get started with this kickoff live stream and uh then have the rest of the heartbeat in gather as we do so anything to say hi if you'd like yana otherwise i'll just make sure everything's all cropped in obs yeah i just want to check that my um oh you're muted mic is working so can you hear me

Sounds fine to me.

Okay, great.

All right.

Okay, great.

So in this organizer and facilitator intro, we're just going to quickly

as usual, go over an introduction to Complexity Weekend because each Heartbeat has people who are returning to Complexity Weekend events as well as joining for the first time.

Then we'll talk a little bit about the February Heartbeat event specifically and show the program and so on.

And then we'll move over to an interactive Jamboard.

So if you're watching live, feel free to write any comments in the YouTube live chat or just

Hang on till the Jamboard comes in the second half of this hour, and then we'll be able to have some discussions and be modifying this shared resource.

Okay.

So welcome to Complexity Weekend, our community of practice.

Just to give a little bit of information on the initial conditions and history of Complexity Weekend, the first proto-Complexity Weekend was in May 2019 in San Francisco in person.

And since then, we've had four online cohort-based weekends, two in 2020, two in 2021.

And each of these weekends has been an awesome and different experience with a

bunch of people coming together from all over and doing Complexity Weekend, which is to say that they're familiarizing themselves with some of the people and tools and ideas of complexity and of our community.

And those who want to are forming teams and teams go a lot of directions.

And we'll be talking more about that.

Here we are, though, in February, at the end of February 2022, and looking forward towards our April weekend.

This graph shows similar information, but a little bit differently with a green line being like the energy of the community or the amount of synchronous activity or any given person's

activity involvement.

And so there's a peak around the weekends, like the November 2021 weekend or the upcoming April 22 to 24 weekend.

And we intend to keep this rhythm of about every six months, twice a year, doing a cohort-based weekend.

And then on every other month, we have these smaller heartbeat events that are a bit more informal,

bit more of a drop in and uh just join when works for you as the weekend is as well but the heartbeat is just two shorter intervals of four hours whereas the weekend is um

kind of continuous for a whole weekend.

And this is the rhythm of the community in green.

And then in the backdrop is you on your complexity journey and the people you're meeting and connecting with and the teams that you're joining or playing a role in.

So that's just one other way to look at how Complexity Weekend is unrolling through time.

Jana or Steven, anything you want to add there?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I'll just say that those peaks can sometimes get little higher pieces going on as certain new ideas creep in and excitements happen.

So there's a multi-scale thing going on in a way where things break off and different energies happen.

But those big peaks are where it all comes together for sure in terms of the energy for people all collaborating and

and I know that you're gonna talk about stuff and I'm gonna talk about stuff like placemaking and stuff which has started to come in as part of sort of generating some of this cohesion around different moments.

So it's sort of deep time, deep space in a way.


SPEAKER_01:
And I'd like to add to that.

So I've noticed like with the peaks, things sort of taper off.

So they're also quite essential to maintaining the kind of momentum of the community.

If we didn't have these kind of larger events with a bit more hype and enthusiasm, I don't think those kind of the smaller heartbeats would be able to sustain themselves.

So we need to have these moments


SPEAKER_00:
these higher peaks so we can also have like these quieter moments during during the heartbeats cool thanks yeah totally agreed and also it's always i guess to say a work in progress would be an understatement it's a co-organized and we make of it with whoever is there each time with

co-organizer teams and so if anybody wants to co-organize or facilitate a future event like the march heartbeat especially right this notch that would be awesome all right well let's continue on another way to look at the complexity weekend community is in terms of um role and event specific practices

so the biggest circle is a participant anyone who's at any complexity weekend is a participant in complexity weekend and then from there we have some event specific roles and so that can include for a heartbeat or for a weekend somebody who is a organizer

a facilitator or an associate or supporter.

So organizers are those who are just watching the spreadsheets and making sure that the communications are occurring.

Facilitators are not lecturers or speakers.

They're there to facilitate participation.

And they're also participants in most of their capacity.

And the associates and supporters provide financial support or otherwise to help the community be sustainable.

The two entry points for participants are the heartbeat, which is where we're at now, as well as the weekend cohorts.

And then forming inside and outside and on the boundary of Complexity Weekend are different teams.

And some of the teams that are totally within Complexity Weekend and with a focus on Complexity Weekend are our committees, which we'll get to in a second, but also participant teams are of many, many different types and it's an ongoing,

task in area of improvement and opening for people's contributions how can we scaffold teams as well as stay in touch with them so that we can have um

good information when people ask, well, what kinds of teams have happened in Complexity Weekend and how to convey that without overload or without too much requirements of those teams and also not constraining what people might do in the future.

Any other comments on this slide?

Okay.

So in 2022, there's a ton of ways to participate in Complexity Weekend at this site, which I'll post right now in the YouTube live chat.

can see our event schedule for the rest of 2022 and also there is a link that hopefully should work or just contact us if it doesn't to add these events to your calendar so you can see them in your time zone because when the organizers are talking about events we'll always be trying to use the date and time in utc because we're extremely global as a community

However, it's really nice to see it in your own time zone as well.

So add that calendar event so that you can see the events like the heartbeat and the weekend.

And also you'll see for upcoming events, there's a facilitator RSVP form and an organizer RSVP form.

So if you're interested in organizing and facilitating for a given event, check out those RSVP forms or just let Complexity Weekend at Gmail know if you have any questions.

So that's one way to participate is any of the heartbeats, any of the weekends, just get involved and register early and bring a friend and just show up however makes sense for you.

Another way to get involved, as mentioned a little bit previously, and somewhat of a new elaboration for 2022, are the committees.

And so we have several of the committees listed here, and some of them are already engaged in weekly meetings and a lot of awesome progress, whereas others are a little bit more latent and a seed committee, so to speak, so that when there's more energy and bandwidth or if something that somebody wants to contribute to more actively,

we can kind of spin it up and we have a variety of committees that give long-term sustainability to several important efforts.

So like maybe just with the placemaking, Stephen wanted to give a thought and then Yana, if you want to add anything as well.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I suppose one thing that's naturally evolved has been how to look at the gather space and, um,

it's been interesting because it's got a lot of conversation almost spontaneously about where we are and how

that situation grounds people, which is really interesting for me because I actually came into complexity in many ways from placemaking and community development contexts and doing community embedded teams in rural Africa and places with communities with disability and trying to allow this place and the land to do a lot of the heavy lifting.

So this has become a circle now to look at, okay,

got more to grips with gather as a medium and starting to think, okay, well, what does it mean to be in this ecosystem?

What does it mean to do activities in this ecosystem?

And how can we think about how we're embodied as we do it and how we're embodied as

comes into play, all of which gives this granularity and complexity, which is often sort of looked at in terms of how to make that negligible, how to get rid of that as a significant factor, say, in science, where we're saying, well, OK, say we want to be able to bring that in.

We want to be able to work with it.

How can we do that?

And so this is really

I think we're actually hitting another level now where we can start to talk about that stuff.

So this is quite exciting.

Thanks, Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
Anything to add, Diana?


SPEAKER_01:
Perhaps something about the committees.

I think they're very helpful if you want to get involved.

so you can kind of think about the things that you are capable of doing and also maybe things you would like to learn and what kind of activities you like to do or how you feel you can best contribute and the committees offer a way for you to do that

And so if you want to get involved in the art and maybe make some graphics or drawings or something for the website, you can participate there.

Or if you want to be a facilitator, you can jump in there.

So there's a whole bunch of different things you can get involved in.

And through the committees is one way to do that.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

Yeah, totally agreed.

So just to give a little information on the previous cohort weekend, so November 2021, a lot of ways to talk about this experience and group of people, but just giving two dimensions of variation.

We were a global cohort.

There were about 160 registered participants from 56 countries.

And there's always an activity distribution within those participants.

And so our goal is just have as many people from as many areas and backgrounds register and have all of them get actively participating.

And then on the right side, it's a graph of people's self-reported familiarity with learning complexity on the x-axis and applying complexity on the y-axis.

And so there's people who said one, one,

totally new to learning and applying complexity or very familiar with both or somewhere in the middle or somewhere else so it's always awesome because when we connect with somebody with a similar or different level of experience it's like an opportunity to learn as well as to hopefully apply complexity which brings us to yeah go ahead yeah i was just saying as well as learning and applying which um


SPEAKER_03:
as we're getting to grips with that, I think there's experiencing, which we all kind of have at different times, but experiencing and being able to talk about that experience.

I think that's part of a type of learning by doing, learning by being immersed.

So I think that's, I wonder what your thoughts on that, but I think that to me, I sense that there's, that's starting to become more part of the conversations.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, it's interesting.

So you brought up experiencing complexity and communicating complexity.

What do you think about that, Jana?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, actually, I wanted to add a bit to what Stephen was saying, that, in fact, learning is applying.

And what formalized education has sort of done is detached learning through application.

And so when we actually learn something, it's when we apply the experience, when we apply what it is we're doing.

And that is the moment of actual learning, not reading it in a book.

That's just bringing some dead text to life.

But when we apply it is when we're learning.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Yeah, a common denominator for all those areas is like,

high quality engagements, not necessarily eight hours in a row, not necessarily an hour a day for seven days, just an instance of high quality connection with a material in a way that enlivens it, like you mentioned, Jana, or like with another person, when maybe you share something in a new way that then you get to reflect on yourself.

So all those elements are really important.

And

We're always looking to learn about more ways.

Yes, Stephen?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I think that high quality... And when we talk about quality as well, we're talking about quality in terms of like...

the detail, the kind of accuracy of the kind of material that we might be getting at, because we have good quality presentations and people who know what they're talking about, but there's almost that high level of qualia that can be engaged.

There's like the ability to hold and feel more stuff.

And that's obviously where you can then have more complexity and you're not trapped in the kind of

the reductive kind of what's the what's the essential things to know and you can sort of because one thing that then that allows is okay what what does that mean outside of the niche field that i'm normally in where i can make all these assumptions and how can i actually be able to listen to someone who's coming from a physics background or a math background or a

a biology background or maybe from a completely other field that is engaging from science or pure sciences that's still trying to bring complexity in to their practices, their teams maybe, maybe more organisational context.

We see a lot of that with human activity systems.

So yeah, I think this is sort of all part of the

the ability to have a regime of attention that has

can be really high quality, like you say.

So what do we mean by quality?

I think is in itself part of the question.

I don't know what your thoughts on that, Daniel.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, good questions.

Come find out.

And then if it's exciting or you see an opportunity to improve, then just like many people do, be a facilitator or an organizer.

in april 22nd we're going to have the next cohort based weekend with the pre-weekend starting about a month before and we kind of have a soft registration opening now and um also a big appreciation to the website team who have pushed an amazing update to the website and also thanks everybody for kind of bearing with our bridge rsvp approach because we're bringing in a few more changes to the website like

a login that will make it really fun and easy to RSVP for events and so on, but we're kind of getting there.

So check out the website it's new and redesigned and the website committee is the group that made it happen.

So I'll just, um,

read some of the what brings us together and collect the purpose and values and so on.

And then if you want to just give any just short thought or highlight one piece, feel free.

Otherwise, no worries.

So from all these different areas and backgrounds, what is it that's actually bringing us together?

It's our shared purpose and interest in complexity science, our desire to have impact on co-creative teams and improve our community of practice through feedback, participation and peer mentorship.

and our shared core values and desire to develop community.

Okay.

Our collective purpose is we learn complexity science by doing, we surf through deep time, and we include to innovate diversity is key.

Anything to add on any of these or no worries if not?

Okay, so we go from what brings us together to be looking at this slide or listening to this or showing up for any discussion to our big why.

And as we start to continue to descend through the clouds from the big why to sort of

How are we going to apply that why?

We get to our values and then eventually our participation guidelines.

So some of our core values, but it's also part of a longer document that we're in the process of

compiling everyone's edits on.

So this is not the full statement.

This is just one representation that we carry over month to month.

Complexity Weekend is itself a complex system.

Education is active.

Learn complexity science by doing.

Teamwork makes the dream work.

Participation means accessibility and inclusion for all.

Respect is key and step up and be brave.

And then the last piece here is the participation guidelines.

So this is how we come together and it's how we enact that how and why.

We encourage participants to adopt a complexity thinking mindset, whatever that means for them at their stage of the complexity journey.

Communication is key, relationships and teams, so multiple scales and nested system communication.

Embrace technology, but know its limits.

So to the extent possible, try to use good audio and visual etiquette.

Full participation while still appreciating diverse abilities.

And reach out on slash to the edges and stay involved.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.


SPEAKER_00:
Great times.

So let's talk a little bit about the February heartbeat itself, and then we'll go over to the Jamboard.

So this is the February 22 heartbeat.

We didn't take a screenshot, Jana, so I just took a meta screenshot of just Complexity Weekend by itself.

A lonesome unitary organism of two co-organizers, as it were, this month.

But thanks a ton for co-organizing, and anyone is always welcome to co-organize.

Just let us know before the beginning of the month if you want to get involved with organizing a heartbeat.

There are a few meetings, so about two to four one-hour meetings, and then a very limited amount of asynchronous work that's totally as you would like it to be.

So hope that anyone who's interested in this can step up and be involved because it's an awesome way to help the community and improve what we iterate on each month.

We'll have two facilitators in February 2022, and that's George Gantz, who's going to be doing some very cool sessions on philosophy and complexity, and Stephen.

And thanks to the facilitators who show up to make it happen, who we can count on to be there for the time they say they're going to be there, and who always hold space for these amazing bottom-up sessions to arise.

I'm sure both George and Steven, it'd be awesome to hear a lecture, but when you come to a facilitated session, that is not what happens.

It's something very special and it's always just really spontaneous and unique based upon who shows up, which is why you kind of have to be there.

And I'll put this in the YouTube chat as well, but this is where we have our program.

for the heartbeat.

So there's two intervals of four hours and at the beginning or really before each interval, feel free to hang out in the Gather and just test your audio visual setup, see if anyone else is around.

And in fact, you can hang out in the Gather atrium anytime you want.

We are here in the first hour where there's a live stream happening.

Following this live stream, we'll go to the Gather atrium.

and have a one-on-one sessions where we have unstructured time of conversation, but we use a remix approach so that people are having several one-on-one conversations.

Then we will have spotlight talks when participants can give a up to five minutes spotlight talk on anything they'd want.

And then George Gantz will facilitate a session, Philosophical Consequences of Complexity Science.

In the second interval, which in the UTC time is for UTC on Sunday the 27th, it's going to start with Stephen facilitating a session Spaces for Inactive Ecological Spatial Approaches to Engagement.

There will then be another one-on-one session, another set of spotlight talks because the people are different each time, and then Jana will facilitate

collaborative writing for the complex curious.

And that's also something we're going to look a little bit at in the Jamboard.

We're here in Gather.

So maybe if either of you would just like to quickly mention anything about Gather or any like tips or anything to say about this.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, one of the things I'd say is

There's a conversation just before I came on just now with a couple of other people about it's a curious space.

And one of the things that makes it work is actually acting and interacting in it.

So being able to get yourself in and moving around is actually part of creating the community here.

And that's actually something which is different to a lot of games where people used to

Zipping through whatever the game is about this is this is we kind of own and occupy this space And there's a couple of new features now on gather.

It's got a little bit more stable.

It's You'll see a little map on the left bottom left of the screen which sort of shows which Which clusters of people are in a space which is useful if it's a bigger room so you can see who's around There's also the

ability to double click on a part of the space and you will automatically walk there so that can be helpful for getting around sometimes although it is good to actually use the arrows because i say in terms of when you first get used to it that gives a bit of a feel for

how the affordances we talk about affordances a lot in ecological psychology and other other areas so there's like an affordances that these chairs and that give you for moving into being blocked by them so yeah play with that and get a feel for that and sort of think about how we're embodied all around that

rather than i'm going into this this this game it's actually somehow it's a shared space that we've made our own it's got its own personality its own sort of dynamic to it so


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Yep, a few new features.

Also, you can right-click on somebody and follow them or request to lead them.

A few other things are also rolling out.

So I hope that everybody can just sort of stick with it if it gives them any friction and just know that we're there to help with any tech issues.

So just kind of to close out this first part,

Your feedback and participation and word of mouth recommendations are the best way for Complexity Weekend to grow.

That's one really important way to support Complexity Weekend.

Also, everyone is welcome to join a committee or co-organize or facilitate at any event.

You can check out this PayPal link if you want to provide support or let us know otherwise, or no worries if not, because there's never a financial barrier to participating.

And contributions are important for making sure that we can have a sustainable community.

That's something we also think about as co-organizers in the weekend when we start to look at the supporter role.

So, cool.

Let's head over to the Jamboard.

I will share this link in the YouTube live chat.

So feel free to join it.

And anything to say about the Jamboard just as I'm sort of re cropping everything.


SPEAKER_01:
So, yeah, I'm looking forward to seeing what people are going to come up with and how everybody is kind of feeling about this heartbeat.

And to look at the first question is, yeah, so what is your intention today?

What would you like to...

maybe figure out or navigate or explore um today um at this heartbeat yeah exactly that's a good point nana um and sharing some people are kind of


SPEAKER_03:
been on the journey a little while and so there might be you know what what's curious now and where are people entering you know what's some of the entry points uh some of which might now be from people that they're friends with or that acquainted acquaintances already part of this process

or part of this journey, or they may have come in through some unknown route.

So we're very curious to know, you know, what their pathway to their intention is.

That's all helpful for us to be able to kind of engage their journey.


SPEAKER_00:
yep there's like the snapshot intention which is sort of where you get caught or what light gets shown on when the question is asked but then we also want to recognize it changes and sometimes changes moment to moment you drop one post-it note and then all of a sudden you have a different intention

Okay, so meet new people.

Yes, definitely.

That's possible at a heartbeat.

Find out what is complexity.

What is complexity?

Let's do a little periphery of this post-it since I don't think that we have another slide for just exploring that.

But recognizing that people are going to

maybe have some shared knowledge of terms or of a book or a lecture or something, but overwhelmingly that will not be the case.

How do we convey and approach just what is complexity and not pass that challenge off to some other resource?

But how do we really square up to this question in its mystery and also make it possible to communicate it?


SPEAKER_03:
Actually, this is a good question because it also highlighted part of the thinking process, wasn't it, that's been happening with Complexity Weekend because there's complexity in the kind of mathematical kind of field that emerged with the Santa Fe Institute particularly and trying to understand and recognise that there is this distinct sort of complex

adaptive systems and behavior but um and then there's also what complexity means in terms of large sort of ecosystems and contextual environments and then there's

people so and in some ways that's been part of thinking about complexity weekend where's that what's the sort of people the personal interaction the complexity of that as a broad sort of bucket what's the kind of complexity um partly also maybe in terms of uncertainty particularly um in terms of what's known unknown what's knowable what's not knowable and then the complexity science of

random attractors and these Dynamics which start to reveal chaotic patterns and stuff like that so um that's something that comes to mind I'm sort of breaking it open I'm not know if I'm actually answering it out answering but yeah I think what is unknown unknown


SPEAKER_00:
for overall and for individuals is a starting point.

So having this question be an opportunity for dialogue where it's like, what does somebody know about complexity?

And

meeting there and seeing where's our zone of overlap where's our contrast what's outside of what we both know and then also what is the state of complexity overall i mean don't we have a complex solution to like solving the ecological problems don't we have a complex governance system yet do we great points being added for other people so here somebody has provided um a note

the insights from mathematics and attractor states and other chaotic patterns

So yes, there's been an amazing flow of ideas from more theoretical or abstract areas.

Some of the terms we hear a lot like attractors and strange attractors, chaos, dynamic systems, and then how that actually translates to our own work and experience, unless we're

know working directly on that research area practice living in a complex space with uncertainty with others yeah great note great intention for showing up to a heartbeat and that's um an experience that opens up for those who stick with the uncertainty and are there and it's sometimes hard to convey this and the relevance of it and also just

sometimes hard to make the space time in life to make this happen, but it's really important.

So we really appreciate each other when we show up this way for each other, the personal interpersonal collective complexity, multiple scales, different levels of perspective taking and different physical states in the moment.

Cool.

So suffice to say that what is complexity and how do we apply complexity, the sort of learning and applying framings of that question, I think we'll talk about it every time because it's always different and it's always important.

The third slide just has a few general notes that were inherited from a previous facilitator, Monica Kang.

on online collaboration.

So I'll read them and then feel free to like add a note or add anything, just are there any general

collaboration or online communication tips that can help us in complexity weekend, but also we can use complexity weekend as like a space to really foster these norms so that we can be more effective outside of the weekend as well.

So use active listening, be curious and open, assume kindness, play by our strengths and over communicate.


SPEAKER_03:
One thing you might want to, it may be less on this one, but we could also think about the way that we come together for the team formation at the big events and the way that there's this kind of percolation in a way through the heartbeats, the kind of revisiting, reforming, restorming, I think sometimes happens and suddenly think, hold on a sec,

Maybe I rushed in a bit too fast with my assumptions during those early days of thinking about what I wanted to explore.

So I think that you're speaking about that there in a way.

And if people do want to...

seek some sort of coaching or some sort of ways to be taken into some of their explorations.

You know, I think there's people here that would be happy to do that.

I'm willing to help take people on some unpacking processes if that's useful.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

So yeah, we have sharing what you are working on and then kind of related to that is make it clear where something is open for participation or engagement for others.

So some things like not to be shared, then don't even worry about sharing it and nobody will know.

But if something is open to being shared or you're even looking for somebody to help,

Even if you don't know what that exactly looks like, then sometimes just sharing that is the first step and technology patients.

So just recognizing we're on different devices, different amount of internet bandwidth and cognitive bandwidth.

So just being patient and gracious can go a long way.

Okay.

So.

Here we are on slide four and we have a few things going on.

There's a tangle of fibers.

There's a few terms that we know and love with people, tools, and ideas.

And a question, who are you and how did you discover complexity?

So feel free to answer this or how does this question relate to the

multicolored ball of yarn or to any of these other words or what other words can we add here?

I'll just give it first thought like on how who someone is in their own perception and their discovery of complexity might be related to people, tools and ideas.

We try to use this set of three terms to convey different components of the Complexity Weekend experience, because there's the tools that we use as an online community, and if we're not using the same tools, then we're just not even on the same platform, and so we cannot communicate.

So tools, especially for online communication, are kind of like a prerequisite.

people are who constitute the community and it's through meeting amazing people that so many cool things can happen and we come to meet new people and to reconnect with people who we've met before and ideas related to complexity are kind of what imbue this whole process with

our first value that complexity weekends a complex system and ideas is kind of like this north star that helps us recognize like even if it's a term that we're very familiar with there's going to be a different perspective on it there's going to be a person's different perspective on it there's going to be a tool that's using that idea differently than how it has been in the past and people come

towards complexity, kind of maybe their trajectory snippets are like these ball of yarn moving around these different areas.

So like personally, I had read several related books and then it was through meeting people in complexity and learning more about the tools

that I started to see more about how all these things could be in harmony together.

And so maybe someone learns more about agent-based modeling from playing with a toolkit, or maybe they're really enthralled by a certain idea, like a phase transition, and they see that as relevant for their work on some kind of systems change.

maybe it's just totally enough and it is to be connecting with cool people so let's look at these comments discovered through the work on getting to maybe okay if that was either view maybe um unpack like what is the power of maybe okay


SPEAKER_03:
power yeah that was me i just put that down yeah there's a book called uh get into maybe which i was recommended an international development event i spoke to a professor there and it it's kind of tying into the it was one of my first introductions to the distinction between the complex complicated and the stacy matrix which i've then encountered many other ways and we've had dave snowden on here with the kinefin which is effectively another

way of presenting that so that that book was kind of leading it was like that permission in a way um actually in a formalized way say it's okay to think and lean into um the complexity it's not just something which um is uh to be got rid of um or an artifact of something less

developed which i think was a kind of a a way of seeing that situation up into the evens to the 90s and 2000s so that book was quite um quite a powerful one for me with uh zimmerman and uh and stuff like that so that's why i put that down cool so balancing


SPEAKER_00:
between streamlining complexity that is creating noise and leaning into the stochastic dynamics and diversity to get a feel for contexts.

I am a complex and personal life defies prediction.

That's kind of that experiential or applying in one's own life through an appreciation for uncertainty.

some different things that people work on so i look at the highest level complexity abstraction global i work on meta networks knowledge management deeper quality platforms creativity and the power of flexible modeling and freedom from static models so cool and um

It's sort of like when we open that space and say yes to maybe or however that is, we do get to move around this area and we get to like look at a tool and look at how dynamic modeling might come into play and then swing towards ideas and reach out to a stakeholder or loop in a friend and learn about a new tool.

So we can kind of move around all these areas and complexity helps us navigate that.

um there was a topic on stumble upon called complexity slash bizarre it was videos on very different weird stuff going on beyond comprehension another one is i diagram.com okay cool yeah like

One answer is just finding it through a keyword search or something like that.

So thanks for this cool slide.

Jana, what would you like to explore or just kind of open in this Jamboard session with this question?


SPEAKER_01:
So curiosity often comes up in complexity.

I think that's a motivator for many people to get into complexity because they are curious about it.

So maybe like, what is it that we're looking for?

What are we wondering about?

And

What is it that is curious about complexity?

What is strange about it?

Or maybe what makes us feel uncertain or afraid about it?

And perhaps it's also a good time maybe to talk about diversity because diversity increases complexity and through that also uncertainty.

So, yeah, what are we curious about?

What do we want to know more about?

And often curiosity maybe comes from a desire to feel a bit more certain about something.

So to feel a bit safer with it.

But at the same time, complexity is endless, just as uncertainty is.

So maybe to let go a little bit of the needing to feel certain and just...

having tools and ways to just be uncomfortable and get used to that discomfort, that everything is always complex.

And we can explore it from that angle.

And I think that was maybe I spoke too long about this.

But, yeah, so what are some things that are strange, uncertain, things you want to know more about?

What are you...

Maybe when you stand back from something, what is like your overall feeling and could that be a motivator for complexity?

So maybe some of the things I like to explore in complexity is systems.

I kind of am interested in how people move around and how our local behaviors

become macro cultures so how are we behaving here like right now and if people if other people who are watching our video adopt some of our behaviors and how does that spread and does that in itself become a culture and so maybe is culture like a kind of macro way of looking at complex behaviors like when you zoom out

So we see one person and how we might behave as an individual, and then you zoom out and you see how the impact is on a larger scale, and that could be, for example, culture.

So that's something that I'm interested or curious about, complexity at least on a human maybe or a community kind of level.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
I'd never really thought about how like almost the implicit attractor of curiosity is to seek information.

There's an open-endedness to curiosity, but curiosity isn't simply open-endedness.

It also involves some informational component.

And so it's a really important,

tension or just sort of kind of friction that can be keeping us warm with our curiosity which is what

drives us to explore new tools ideas and people and also to remix ones that we've seen in the past and then how to how to balance that with what we always say and know about complexity like you can study your whole life on just one part and you still wouldn't be an expert or we're never going to be able to um have total certainty so how do we kind of balance that okay how to trust

universe even if it is so deeply complex and challenging how to value samsara okay just look that up so we have a definition that's just like um

okay i'll copy a definition and that's always like something people can feel welcome to do is like if there's a term that maybe uh might not be familiar then just like add it to a definition or something um a term that's very familiar for one person might not be for another person yes that's interesting i like this multi-scale the the complex uh universe there's also this idea of


SPEAKER_03:
like each person's universe is a system of information in each moment.

So like, how am I at the moment?

What is this moment like?

What's my universe at this moment?

And then that world that's complex in a way that hidden world.

And then there's this universe that's beyond our comprehension in terms of scale.

So I think there's a, um, yeah.

What, what does it mean to be deeply complex as opposed to complex?


SPEAKER_00:
what's similar or different about that that's interesting yeah kind of relating to that and also the local global like bucky fuller talked about my private sky and the joke is like the sky is not belonging to each individual yet also each individual is in a unique perspective and does have this realm around them that is like their private sky and maybe even architecture can help scaffold that um


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, that's actually a good, I like what you're saying there, because I think that in our, the way our technology is scaled up, it's like, we have lots of eyes as in identities that can engage the world and network up in more and more ways.

However, when you don't have those opportunities, you may have to use a few moments where

a group is given that chance to form some sort of collective world, a collective moment of making sense of complexity.

So there's something in complexity coming in and acknowledging that we don't know, but we also have a kind of knowing

collectively and we need to allow that collectivity to come together in ways which are mindful of enabling that complexity to do a lot of rich work.

And it's not just a case of networking us up like we would network up nodes on a computer system.

There's something else going on there.


SPEAKER_01:
So the nodes to me almost feel something static.

And we are living beings, living people, and we're always in motion.

So... So if the system and our ability to know is always in motion, that means there is a constant change.

And then how can...

the stories that we tell and the stories that we tell each other change and adapt with us and we we know that we as humans do that through oral storytelling and we carry stories through generations through narratives that we tell each other directly or express or perform or maybe not perform because

but the living stories that we embody for lack of a better word.

So, but when we make like a network and we formalize it and we put links and edges, it reduces that movement.

So, so maybe that's something that.


SPEAKER_03:
Can I just bounce off that?


SPEAKER_01:
And also it kind of,


SPEAKER_03:
it kind of like constrains either by size or by boundary what each of those nodes is interacting with it's kind of like they're kind of defined in some way whereas like you're saying this this this kind of dispersive living i mean we're seeing this now as we you know we we it reveals to us with all the kind of traumas

endlessly permeating from the first world war through the whole of western the whole world of west you know that first world war the whole thing that's going on in ukraine at the moment the dynamics that are playing out with um the historical embodied uh land-based um

questions and also the kind of the cultural clashes, the unresolved, the traumas and the lack of appreciation of top-down

rulemaking to just carry on with business as usual and who knows because it's it's it's I don't I'm not saying anyone knows what's exactly going on there at the moment but this this is a this is obviously going to be something that's going to be on people's mind during this this particular heartbeat yeah thank you for sharing it Steven so


SPEAKER_00:
that brings us to the end of the hour and many more great comments here and this is just the total tip of the iceberg because we're about to be able to continue to have these discussions and explore more with each other in gather and beyond so we will end the live stream take a few minutes just stretch and take a breath

and meet you in the gather atrium where a few minutes from now we will begin the 101 session so yana thanks a ton for organizing and facilitating stephen thank you for facilitating as well and see you all very soon