SPEAKER_00:
And this is Synergetics stream number 12.

Looks like everything is working.

Today in Synergetics number 12, the spirit for today is reformat, partition, and listen.

Today in 12.0, we're going to go over some key memes and themes, then the things to integrate, and go to some text readings.

be two sections of the text readings the first is going to be a second session i guess on cosmography with a focus on the rhetoric of the tet the tetrahedron the tetravertexion then the second half of the text reading will be section 200 in synergetics narrative exposition of spherical accommodation

We can start with just some of the key memes and themes of Synergetics.

Synergetics is relational and multi-scale thinking.

We're going to come back to that multiple times today.

It's connected to accessible experiences.

In Synergetics, there are no infinitesimals or points, lines, planes, at least in the traditional sense, but we'll come back to that in the rhetoric of the TED.

Synergetics frames design as anticipatory cybernetic science, and there's this relationship between the applied tensegrity and the theoretical synergetics, somewhat like the applications of engineering and the theory of physics.

But the big ideas, of which there are multiple, one of them here is that space has a shape, and it's a very specific shape.

Universe is the total scenario, and it doesn't need a the because it's the only one, whereas system is any specified subsystem, which implies that it must exist, ergo it has to have geometric spatial properties.

And there's this 4D meme that we see from the beginning onwards that has to do with a few different senses of thinking 4D, including 4D time lock, a tetrahedral focus, which is one of the main parts of today, as well as other ways that 4D is playing out.

On the key memes and themes...

I think it's been mentioned on the stream before that Trimtab was being asked about some big ideas to compile.

So here's an email from Richard Ramsey.

Hope it's okay since it was a public mailing list on October 7th.

And Richard wrote, I tried my hand at mapping the big ideas on my whole system mapping framework.

I worked off of a recent set of slides used for a suicide prevention workshop in a curriculum design project.

So Richard's a really cool and insightful person and has a lot of experience with applying synergetics in social contexts.

So I thought it'd be cool to, with credit, show some of his work

ways of reorganizing the big ideas that trim tab reading group had come up with with help from kurt and others so the orange is the design science methods ds design science yellow is the design systems change the gray triangles are the design system

design science system, and then the blue is the person.

And so these are some of Bucky's big ideas.

Like here it says guinea pig B. That's one of Bucky's nicknames for himself because he was just saying how he was always experimenting with himself, seeing what a regular person could do.

So this is kind of an idea of him as a person.

And that's a few other points here, like Applewhite, the collaborator on Synergetics project.

Whereas in the methods section, just like a paper, we see some of the methods like tensegrity, linear, nonlinear systems, trim tab, a lot of related topics there.

So that's pretty cool, like a geometric way that Richard generalized from his work in the social context.

And then here's a second image that's kind of unpacking it.

So it's those four areas and it kind of is like a tet of tets.

which is something that we're going to come back to again later.

But each one of these has like multiple sections and just showing how, how do we represent Bucky's big ideas?

Because they're so big and there's so many of them.

So how do we, and some of them have been accredited to him when they shouldn't have been and vice versa.

So how do we really know what,

to summarize Bucky's work with.

Thanks, Richard, for the really cool, though, images.

Thanks for sharing them.

All right, and the things to integrate hasn't really changed that much.

So anything that people suggest here or in the YouTube live chat, I'll be watching that.

Just we'll integrate it later.

okay well the first section is going to be pulling from mainly chapter six of cosmography and it's going to be called rhetoric of the tet so this was a list i compiled yesterday when rereading cosmography the book chapter six and just to refresh on the book itself so the book is uh written with bucky as the i guess big font author

and with Chromia as an adjuvant on the cover there.

And it was mostly written before Bucky's physical death in 1983, but then it was revised and published later.

So it was kind of a posthumous collaboration.

That's why it's called a posthumous scenario.

And in Synergetic Stream 10, there was some discussion on the earlier chapters.

This is going to focus...

pretty much on chapter six, which is a longer section with a lot of images.

And also thanks to Brett for digitizing this ebook, letting us use it for education.

So when reading chapter six,

it just struck me that there were so many ways that the tet the tetrahedron the tetra vertexion here's my my desk tet as i sometimes show there are so many ways that the tet was being deployed and justified and utilized

And so this is a totally partial list.

It's not all of the mentions of the Tet or uses or implications of the Tet in chapter six of Cosmography, and certainly not the full set.

And so that's why I chose 15 to stop at, because we saw earlier that there was this four times four, the Tet of Tets.

The Tet of Tets is 16.

So 15, incomplete.

Five times three, incomplete.

There's more to be added.

This isn't even all the Tet memes we've previously talked about on the stream.

But there are definitely 15 things about Tets that people might not have expected to be

playing out in synergetics the way that they do.

So here I'm just going to read the 15 points and then the next slides are going to go through each point and use an image or some text from Cosmography to show about why it is that way or just something that that lets us do.

so tet is in tetrahedra it's a long word means four faces tetra vertexion is also equally appropriate means four vertices and uh it's a long word either way so we can just go with tet and that's the shape down here on the bottom so tet is minimal space enclosing 3d existing system tet has multiple physical realizations that has omni triangular stabilization

Tet has four faces, six edges, and four vertexes.

Tet densely connects 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 12, and 24.

Tet world can make cubes but not vice versa as well.

Tet can handle powers of numbers as well as the cubic paradigm can.

Tet is the minimal geometric and topological system, so it's an interaction model.

Tet is a mnemonic for phase change.

Tet structures of tunable frequency can make points, lines, and planes.

Tet tensegrity analysis gives a natural model of function, constraint, and nesting.

Tet great circles eliminate the need, not the existence, for pi.

Tet, just one, is hiding inside of every closed object or system.

Tet accounting is clean for angular, general, length, and volumetric measures, which are specific.

tet invariance group equals best invariance group all right well let's see about this list and of course this is just a work in progress just like all these streams are so if people have other parts of the tet that they love or they don't think that one of these are relevant just let me know in the live chat leave a comment so first two so tet is the minimal space enclosing system

And the Tet has multiple physical realizations.

So the minimum system is in figure six, four.

So when there are four events, four events occurring, four parts of a system, it is the first shape that separates insideness from outsideness with a betweenness reflected by the face.

So there can be the minimum system of an atom existing sort of by itself, not interacting.

Okay.

Cool story.

There's the story of the dyad.

There's the story of the triangle.

Those are all conceptual.

But the first system that starts to take enclosing space form in the real world is

not to say that the metaphysical isn't important, but in the physical world, is the tetrahedron.

So it takes a special place as the minimum polyhedra and the minimum system.

That's the first point.

So why go with a Tet?

Why go Tet first, over a cube first, or over some other shape?

Well, it's the simplest, smallest, first one that can exist in 3D.

Second point, Tet has multiple physical realizations.

So this is from figure 6.13.

Three ways of physically demonstrating the simplest system in the universe, the four vertexion.

The tetrahedron, tetravertexion or four vertexion, can be equally validly drawn as, one, the platonic solid emphasizing the four faces, which alternatively are known in synergetics as divergent openings.

So this is the traditional platonic tetrahedron, means four faces.

So that's four faces of the 10.

Alternatively, we can think about it in terms of the six lines or edges, which are known in synergetics as vectors.

So here we're seeing this as sort of energy vectors connecting energy events, which can be attractive or repulsive, like gravitational or radiational.

then the edges connecting the events are energy vectors and then there's a third framing of the tet which is the vertex domains which alternatively are known in synergetics as the closest packing of spheres so here's a few different framings we can have the face centered understanding of the tet which has this folding and unfolding ability as shown in the 6.13 there's this edge model

with like toothpick model of the Tet, and it takes six edges.

And then there's the energy event, either radiating or gravitational event, or the close packing of spheres, which is shown here.

There's a few other representations that look pretty cool that are in cosmography.

So here's the folding and unfolding.

This is the involution and evolution of a Tet.

So it starts folded and then it opens at the one corner and fold through flat.

And then it reformats the other way, which is analogous to in two dimensions, what a triangle can do.

So that's pretty cool.

And then here is a connection in a figure 6.59, four vectors of restraint to find minimum system.

And it goes through, this is not very clear on the video probably, but wind instruments looks like kind of a pendulum.

This says string instruments on a plane, drums, kind of like a tension system, and then gongs.

So this is kind of cool thinking about what sound does the different constraints make in a tet.

So very flexible of a shape.

can think about it as the centers of spheres that are close packed the minimum spaces the minimum edges there's a lot of ways just to get at the ted so those are points one and two all right point three and four so points three and four we have so that will change the numbers

So Tet has omni-triangular stabilization, and Tet has four faces, six edges, and four vertexes.

So first, fourth, point three.

Figure 2-7.

Here is a Tet with all of the triangulations drawn with the octahedra inside of it.

And so I'll read the caption.

The three great circle spun square planes exactly bisect the tetrahedron in three symmetrical ways.

Note the primary tetrahedron and the secondary internal octahedron, and only then are the implied square cross sections of the octahedron apparent as tertiary derivations of the primary structural system, the tetrahedron.

There is no single plane, omni-equal angle, equal edge square structural integrity in universe.

Squares and cubes are always and only tertiary derivations of prime vectorial structuring systems.

So that's going to be a theme we return to, which is that if we look at structure empirically, we find that in planar systems, the triangle is the unit of structure, and in

Space enclosing systems, the TET, is the minimal unit of structure in terms of what can be supported from a system resilience and stability perspective.

whereas cubes are always emergent at larger spatial scales or in derivative form relative to the structural stabilization of tets.

So one advantage of the tet, point three, is that it's all triangular all the time.

Whether it looks like my desk tet or another tet, it's all triangles, so there's no need to entail some other level of structure.

We can just take the system as its own unit of structure.

because triangles and tetrahedra are the minimal units of structure in two and three dimensions.

Point four, Tet has four faces, six edges, and four vertexes or vertices.

Bucky kind of different times in his life probably used both words.

So just looking at the number of faces, edges, and vertices.

First, there's the relationship of the faces and the two-ness, which we won't even go into.

So there's equations that relate these three columns to each other that are very important, that hold for all shapes.

So that puts them all in equal grounding.

But just looking at the numbers here, it's pretty clear to see that there's fewer faces, fewer edges, and fewer vertices.

So this is like getting the minimal system.

It's just parsimonious,

it's going to not require any second level explanation for why we don't want the tetra teacher it's just the default choice it's the smallest one that's point four okay point five so point five is ted densely connects one two three four six and twelve and twenty four okay so this is um a little bit of a

numerology discussion, but it relates to the geometry and the relationship between the tet and oct.

So here we saw the oct implicit in the tet.

One way that this is facilitated is that the six edges in the tetrahedron can be thought of as analogous or corresponding in space to the six vertices of the octahedron.

This is a consequence of the fact that the octahedron can be inscribed in a tetrahedron.

The six edge midpoints of the tetrahedron are the six vertices of the octahedron.

And then there's more information, a few links.

So here's where that comes into play in cosmography.

Okay.

All right.

So here, six dimensionality of both tetravertexion, the tet, and it's contained hexavertexion, the oct.

here are those four energy events the four corners the static somethings then there's the macrocosmic tetrahedron outsideness it it describes the maybe even markov blanketed or just the external external system then there's the octahedral microcosm with insideness this is the the shape rattling around inside of the tet

And then this is being related to thought, with thought tuning into the relevant wavelength.

So this is just one way that we're getting that 4, 6, 4 of the faces, edges, and vertexes, but also getting the faces, edges, and vertexes of the octahedron, 12, 8, and 6.

then eight kind of comes along when you get twos and fours so i didn't write it as a tenant exactly but it's relevant but it's kind of 12 and it's divisors as well like one and twelve two and six three and four so this relationship allows a lot of jumping around between different shapes because it can be like okay well here's the points of

the six vertices of the octahedron and now those are going to be the midpoints of the edges of the tet and then that's going to do this and then that's going to divide and go over here so you can kind of hop around the system based upon where there's overlap like a train station all right then here is another where it connects to 24. so here's that tet in a and figure 640

tetra protect the tet the quarter tet which has four congruent shapes that look like um they have a reduced height but a broad base then those get divided into another tet and that becomes 1 24th of a tet which is called an a module so that's a pretty cool thing like the tet subdivides to a tet and i guess that's where the buck stops but

somebody else probably knows more about that than me and then just these are kind of thought questions like what is the consequence of this deep linking of one two three four five oh one two three four six sorry eight twelve what connections can we make

And then the question, where are the 5, 7, and 11-nesses in the system?

I know there's people who have a lot of different thoughts about 5, but 7 and 11, also maybe prime numbers, where are those in the system?

Do we need them?

then nine and ten which are not prime numbers because nine is like three times three and then ten is two times five so where are those in this system where's nine and ten how do we get nines and tens do we need them so that's point five that the tet gives us this nexus like a mnemonic or a lobby where we can

come to the Tet, and then pop off towards a different direction, like a number, like 12, and then go from 12 to 144, and then divide by two, different number transportations.

Okay, so now point six.

So point six is Tet world can make cubes, but not vice versa as well.

So remember first, there's this Oct in the Tet,

then that relates to here squares and cubes are always and only tertiary derivations of prime vectorial structuring systems so one way we get the cube is from the oct with the faces that it defines

And it itself is inscribed inside of a larger tet.

So that's this, remember the oct in the tet.

But also this kind of tet above, tet below system, the star oct.

This, these six points end up inscribing the tet.

And here's the quasi-cube as well.

So one way to think about it is if you have...

Pixels, you're always going to get pixelated tets.

No matter how large you make the tetrahedra, there's going to be a ragged pixelated edge.

And then you can interpolate it and try to make it smooth with high resolution.

But the tet gives us a natural way to form cubes in a tet-first world.

whereas the cubes don't give us as natural of a way to form tets in a cube first world which is something we're going to return to because here the corollary of that decision so let's just call that decision whether to go tet first or oct or tet first or cube first let's just call that decision cultural the corollary of the decision is that in the tet world

when things are at first the cube is the odd fellow so here is figure 6.73 in cosmography it's the cube stabilized with a tetrahedron why is that a valid decision why is it okay to cross so that's one two three four that are being stabilized by triangles and then there's one going the other direction covering the other bases

Well, you need that.

If you're building a house that looks like a rectangle, you need that cross bracing for structural stability.

So it's not just a nice coincidence.

It's actually an implied structural consequence of a cube.

So here in this table, it makes the area...

over area squared look very clean.

It's like it has a volume of one, it has a surface area of six, so that's pretty clean.

Whereas the other shapes have kind of strange relationships.

So that's one way to, in this cubic world, to talk about these numbers.

So it's not like they're bad, but you know, they have some decimal points.

but later as we see if we multiply by these dymaxion constants which we're going to come back to later here as well as in the narrative exposition at the end 200 so if we use this linear area and volumetric so first second and third power relationships

And we say, okay, the tetrahedra, we're going to say it has four faces.

It has an area of four.

I need to buy four triangles of paint to paint my tet.

It takes one unit of brass.

Thanks, Trevor, again for this beautiful desk tet.

And then the edge amount is going to be one.

It could be a six, but we're just going to renormalize it to one.

So in this world where we've converted according to the Dymaxion constants, we see that the octahedron has a clearly revealed volume of twice that of the tet with four-fold volume and the same edge length, edge ratio.

So we can see cube now stands out as the one where the edge is something like root two.

But what's interesting is it has an integer volume of exactly three.

So just like there's an incommiserability, it's clear that we're either going to renormalize to the cube and then have a lot of irrationals in other shapes, or we can have a lot of integers for most shapes, many shapes, tet shapes, and then the cube has some nice properties, like a volume of three on the dot, and then a few weird properties

like its edge, including the root two.

But again, we're going to come back to that.

And so it's just to say, like, you can't have both be integers because they're clearly not on the same meter stick.

Let's go with the tet having the nice values.

And then the cube will just have some quirks, but that's okay.

It's a quirky shape.

And then here's another relationship with a cube.

Like a cube may be formed by placing four one-eighth octahedra with their equilateral faces on the faces of a tet.

Since tet volume equals one and one-eighth oct equals one-half, the volume of the cube will be one plus four halves equals three.

So that's sort of a first principles operational constructivist proof.

proof by demonstration of rebuilding a cube of volume three nucleated around a smaller tet.

So just anything that people have nice to say about cubes, let's let it be said, but also recognize that it might derive from a downstream or upstream tet.

Seven.

All right, so seven says,

Tet can handle powers of numbers as well as the cubic paradigm can.

So sometimes when people are learning about Tet and the quadrace and the school of tomorrow, they might think, well, how could we ever get rid of squaring a number or number cube?

You know, three cubed or two cubed, two squared.

Isn't that literally just two by two?

Isn't that literally a square number?

So here, and then here's a physics interpretation.

It's not just connect four where you are squaring numbers.

This is in cosmography.

Talking about gravity.

The system component intertensioning, so thinking about gravity in terms of tension as opposed to compression, tensegrity, always conforms to Newton's gravitational law, which states that the relative degree of interattractiveness of any two bodies in the macro or microcosmos always varies inversely as the second powering, N squared,

and to the second power.

the respective arithmetical distances intervening have the distances and increase the inter attractiveness fourfold so somebody will say interesting tetrahedral ideas but don't power law relationships and power relationships amongst numbers in the real world empirically demonstrate a quadrangular accounting so here's 6.75 the quadrangular accounting so here's how people quadrangularly account for squaring

They say it's like the game Battleship, or Connect Four, or chess, or Risk.

You just do M times N, and that's the number squared.

That's multiplication.

But also, it turns out that in two and three dimensions, you can also do triangular accounting.

Here's one, four, nine, 16, and the exact analog for three dimensions.

So in other words, that number to the second and the third and the nth power is a relationship that has to do with geometric scaling rather than uniquely identifying the cubic world as a singular explanatory or descriptive factor of reality.

numbers being raised to powers is about the shape of space and the shape of the numbers it's not about cubes or squares so it's better to say that a number is being raised to the second power than it's being squared even though i literally said it when i was reading it but that's just like going upstairs and downstairs when really it's in stairs and out stairs this is just language that helps us

prevents us from kind of grasping what synergetics is about and what it means for us so eight all right so eight tet is the minimal geometric and topological system so it provides an interactionist model all right so here this is figure 6.7 in cosmography

So given underlying order in superficially seeming randomness law, the number of interrelationships x of a given number n of something is x equals n squared minus n over two.

So this is kind of a relationship people who have studied network theory or any sort of graph theory will know this.

This is like the number of edges in an undirected graph.

Because basically it's the number all by all minus the ones that each one can make by itself.

So that's kind of like effectively taking one of the nodes and off the table.

And then you're going to double count.

So you divide by two so that you don't get double counting.

But if it was a directed network, then it would be just n squared minus n. Or you could even have just simply n squared.

that's represented on the left column here if you have one point you have no inter relationships a b has one edge a b b c and a c three points make a triangle so there's three edges four points make a ten look at that that's the minimum 3d system here's where our tet comes into existence but note that there's kind of a few concordant representations

So as we get more and more events, there just gets a denser and denser web.

And the number of interrelationships, it turns out, doesn't just scale numerically according to this N squared minus N over two sequence series, but also it's the number of kisses in this stack of oranges.

With each one that you add, each layer you add, adds an even larger amount of interrelationships into the system.

So here's that two N squared, but it's not squared, but it's calculating and numbers being raised to powers in a way with this differential.

And so this is just to suggest that tets and the kind of structure that they build as they get into the high frequency zone, large tets, many layers,

gives us maybe some insight into the law of large numbers and mean field approximations.

So we know about the Gaussian, how many random variables multiplied or added together, for example, will give certain types of Gaussian variance.

So maybe here's a geometric component to that.

And also Tet let us model things that seem parallel as well as things that seem densely packed or ragged or sharp, because you can just imagine these packings of kind of atoms, packings of oranges, it can be a really narrow stack, but we can still think of the Tet as being the shape of that stack.

And then again, what this point was supposed to be about, eight, this interaction model that because we can think about the points, the vertexes as events and the edges as relationships, we get this minimal topological and geometric system.

So point, line, and plane, just like Kandinsky, point, line, plane are topological.

but they're not geometric in the real world because even the canvas or the paper in the real world has three dimensionality, ergo it's geometric.

Okay, nine.

TET is a mnemonic, so memory device, for phase change.

This is one maybe we've talked about before, or maybe it was in TrimTab, but there's a few ways that TETs can associate.

So if they're touching at one vertex, it's a gas phase.

So let's see.

Trivalent bonding of... Figure 637.

Trivalent bonding of vertexial spheres forms rigid structures.

At C, gases are monovalent, single bonded, omni-flexible, with inadequate inter-attraction, separatist, compressible.

At B, liquids are bivalent, double bonded, hinged, flexible, with viscous integrity.

At A,

Rigids are trivalent, triple bonded, rigid with highest tension coherence.

So note that double bond and triple bond are not, it's not the carbon bonds you learned about in chem class.

This is synergetics bonding along a point, edge, or plane, one, two, or three bonds.

So it's not trying to use the turf of carbon bonding.

It's just giving us a way to think about some of the properties and constraints and restriction of degrees of freedom of gas, liquid, and crystal.

So that's pretty cool.

Maybe cubes do that too, but it's cool to see tets do it.


UNKNOWN:
10.


SPEAKER_00:
So 10, again, the Kandinsky.

Tets structures of tunable frequency, so that means of different size, like different Lego size, can make points, lines, and planes.

So the Tet alone is a point.

It's like the tiniest little granule of sand.

So that's how it becomes a point.

But how do we get lines, things that look like struts or things that look like planes, like pieces of paper in a Tet world?

And so here's how people would solve it in the cubic world with just a row of blocks, kind of like a skyscraper or like a Jenga block.

But remember that from earlier that there's this,

tet inscribed in the cube figure 673 cosmography so we're going to inscribe a tet in every cube both of them both directions so that allows to build this tensegrity mast

The minimum structural system in the universe, the tet, can be tensegrity structured.

A linear growth of the tensegrity tet becomes a tensegrity column.

Because carbon fiber is most probably constructed in exactly this way as a tensegrity tet column, it is demonstrably the strongest and lightest column structurally producible.

The column and its method of assembly are shown in 6.47.

So again, there's this concordance between

the six, move that out of the way, between the six faces of the cube and the six edges of the tet.

And then every cube has eight corners and every tet has four corners.

Every cube contains two tets, ABCD and WXYZ, because each of the six faces has two diagonals, the positive and the negative set.

So the diagonal on the cube, which is root two, 1.4, allegedly,

is the edge of the Tet.

So Tet edge is irrational in the cube world, but as we saw, vice versa as well.

So it's kind of like two cultures, cube and Tet cultures, and they're irrational to each other.

But we can build long, thin tetrahedral masts, as well as rows of them for planes.

So what does that look like?

This is a nice figure.

Figure 649.

So tensegrity mass as struts.

Miniaturization.

I'm not sure how to say that word.

Approaches for atomic structure.

Miniaturization.

Someone help me.

But it's kind of showing like an investigator looking at these little tensegrity struts and they look like they're rods.

They look like they're compression elements in the geodesic dome.

But actually you look at them with a magnifying glass and their tension elements.

So this is just a huge important point, which is that tension at one scale spatially can be compression at another scale.

So tension

keeps the structural integrity of this mast.

It's the tight wires that keep it up like a spine.

But at another level of structural analysis, this can be a compression element, even though we know that the mechanism of structural stability is tension.

So that's really important for nesting, which brings us to point 11.

So that's one way that nesting happens in synergetics, but also 11, which is tet,

Tensegrity analysis gives a natural model of function constraint in nesting.

So here's figure 646.

A system within a system.

Tensegrity Tet with a tensionally positioned central ball suspended at its center of volume.

Central ball completely restrained in terms of all 12 degrees of freedom of all individual systems.

Note that the six solid compression members, that's the six rods here, six edges,

are the acceleration vectors trying to escape from the system on either end by action and reaction.

Whereas both ends of each would-be escapee are restrained by four tensional wires

too short, and too long, while the ball at the center is restrained from local displacement, torque, and twist by three triangulated tension wires also tendentially affixed to each of the four corner balls.

So kind of like the energetic desires of the Tet allow a system to be nested inside of Tet.

So we saw Tet as minimal system, but now there's going to be another system nested inside of Tet.

That's one point.

Because Tet is so minimalist and austere as a system, it allows nesting as well as, of course, the lateral composition of systems really well.

This is another also restriction of degrees of freedom based argument for first principles using a Tet.

So here's a Tet.

Here's a radiation of a universe and a disintegrating event, which is like rays going out into the universe.

And then here's gravity.

That's a closed event.

And so it's sort of like a tripod.

It implies...

a triangle of structural bounding.

Like if you had a rope that was a fixed length and you had a tripod that was just trying to spread out, it would stop and make a tet when the legs had spread out to the length of the rope.

And then if there was more force, more weight pushing down, then the rope would snap.

or if there wasn't enough force pushing down to make the rope expand out, it wouldn't be a Tet either.

So this is kind of like a first principles approach.

And then if you had just a triangle, like two connecting pieces, then any gust of wind would knock it over.

And if you had just one, it would also fall over.

So it's the minimal

stability system to have that tripod pushing its weight out and then the rope on the ground so that's one argument minimal structural stability here's another one here's that one stick can go in any degree of freedom any direction two sticks any degree of freedom you restrict their degree of freedom but they still have multiple ways they can fall

you restrict the degrees of freedom of three sticks they can still fall in certain ways and then when you have all but one edge it can still flap and unflap so you need that last edge to get structural stability and you don't get structural stability before then so it's like necessary and sufficient there's nothing even close to that in the cube world so

If there's a cube proponent, I'd love to hear your thoughts on this slide.

All right, so 12.

12 is tet great circles eliminate the need, not the existence of pi.

So this is probably going to be contentious.

And so it's not that pi doesn't exist as an asymptote or even a calculable number with some special properties.

here's what it says in the text figure 653 the four great circles of a sphere the spherical tetrahedron divides area of sphere into four triangulated areas with base times altitude

eliminating the need for pi.

So it's not that pi is being eliminated as a concept, we still get to have it as a concept, but we don't potentially need to use it in calculation because these four points are where the four great circles intersect.

And they happen to be the points of tetrahedra.

So we have equations that relate the relationships of those points

in a polyhedral coordinate system rather than a spherical or radial coordinate system.

So we're just going to have different corrective numbers, but things are going to be calibrated to the tet, to so-called 60 degrees, rather than calibrated to some other number.

But it turns out that they divide well into each other, so it might not matter.

Okay, so maybe there's more to say on that one, but let's go to 13.

So 13.

Tet, just one, is hiding inside of every closed object or system.

So here's figure 655, angular topology independent of size, cosmography.

equation of angular topology s plus 720 equals 360 times x n where s equals the sum of all the angles around the vertexes and x n equals the number of vertexes or crossings so this is true for a line as well as a tet which is if you take the number of vertexes and then you sum the angles around the vertex

and then you multiply the sum of angles by the number of vertexes.

So these are all regular shapes.

So each vertex is gonna be able to just be multiplied just like the other ones.

They're part of the same symmetry groups.

It turns out that when you get basically the space that an unfolded shape would have,

minus the shape that a folded shape has, you always get 720.

So boom, boom, boom, boom, 720, 720, 720.

And it turns out that that relationship, figure 654, tetrahedral mensuration, means measurement applied to spheres, that 720 difference between basically the internal and the external angles

it holds even when the number of angles summed is like 300,000 in this case, 292,000.

So there's a tetrahedra inside of all of these polyhedra because it just turns out that the shape that has to get taken out topologically

to make a closure is 720 degrees, double twist, it's a Tet.

So 720 happens to be the angular sum of a Tet.

So it's just an interesting note.


UNKNOWN:
14.


SPEAKER_00:
So Tet accounting is clean for angular or general properties.

as well as specific measures like length and volume so we saw from the um orange stacking that there was a clean accounting of volume or mass but here in figure 656 tetrahedral mensuration applied to well-known polyhedra we discovered that the sum of angles around all vertexes of all solids is evenly divisible by the sum of the angles of a tet the volumes of all solids may be expressed in tet

So we have the sum of angles is divisible with the sum of angles of a tet, and the volume of solids is also divisible by a tet.

So that divided by 720 is angular, and then there's a volumetric component as well.

So think about graphic designers and video game designers and trying to make cubes describe reality or look realistic.

But potentially, we have an accounting system here for

length, or edge length, for volume, and for angle, all in terms of tet.

So sounds pretty cool.

And then here's the 15th and final point, which is tet invariance group equals best invariance group.

So this one I'm not as sure about, but maybe somebody who's listening knows more.

So here's figure 680, constant properties of the tetrahedron.

and so it gives several constant properties so check out cosmography to learn about some of these invariances that are related to moving the points around or pushing them through other shapes then here's one of the interesting invariances just to give an idea of what these are constant unit volume progressions of asymmetric tet in this progression of other ever more asymmetric tet only the sixth edge remains constant

tetrahedral wavelength and tuning permit any two points in universe to connect with any other two points in universe so here it's like two points here and then those two points at the same distance got you know transmitter and a receiver over here this is going to still have the same volume of one even as the shape changes vastly so that's pretty interesting but the tet invariances are the best invariances

That's it for the Tet rhetoric.

Again, that's only 15 points and there's probably 1,500, but that's what was just being used naturally in the sixth chapter of Cosmography.

So it just shows how dense the Tet web is woven by Bucky et al, et al, et al, and just how deep geometry is.

the second part of synergetics number 12 we will go to synergetics section 200 narrative exposition of spherical accommodation but before that begins we will go back to slide 1082 so in synergetics number 10 we talked about this sequence of or i i guess 11 not in video number 11.

talked about this sequence of considerations so basically nine things to keep in mind nine considerations about synergetics energetic vectors avogadro's energy accounting angular constancy isotropic vector model close packing of spheres diametric unity vector equilibrium concentric polyhedral hierarchy and synergetics

then we ended with this cool image about like modern geometry research and ancient and everything in between so that's kind of where we're at and then the next slide is uh the tenth consideration so the tenth consideration is so different from the first nine

But, and so much longer that it demanded its own segment.

So here it is.

This is Synergetics, section 200, Narrative Exposition of Spherical Accommodation.

So just a quick reminder, spherical accommodation means kissing spheres.

We're going to say unity is...

plural, and at minimum two.

Unity is going to be the distance between these two spheres.

So each are going to have a radius of one, but then unity is going to be plural and going to be valued at two.

So this is the area we're going to be talking about.

Consideration 10.

The Spheric Experience.

Energetic Reality.

Accounting versus Abstract Cubic Accounting.

So we're going to be contrasting Fake News, Cube, Minecraft World, with Tet World, Spherical Accounting, 4D, all we see. 202.

In Synergetics 1, sections 262 through 966, I developed the first, second, and third power values of my numerical factors for converting the XYZ coordinate system's edge lengths, square areas, and cubical volumes to my 1927 discovered Synergetics system's unit vector equilibrium, vectorial edge lengths, triangular areas, and tetrahedral volumes.

See table 963.10.

here's the table.

It didn't convert too well.

RIP.

So this is just saying that there was some conversion factors necessary for the first, second, and third order relationships for line, face, area, and then volume.

First, second, and third order relationships had to be corrected in

Tet world as opposed to cube world.

It just had to be done.

203, the synergetics coordinate system in contradistinction to the XYZ coordinate system is linearly referenced to the unit vector length edges of the regular Tet.

each of whose six unit vector edges occur in the isotropic vector matrix as the diagonals of the cube's six faces.

We also recall that the eight corners of the cube are defined and structured omnitriangularly by the symmetrically inter-arrayed and concentric pairs of positive and negative tetrahedra.

So that's why...

there is a good first section on the rhetoric of the Tet and on cosmography, because a lot of those topics we saw about cubes and Tets.

So that relationship between the six vector edges and how those on the Tet are part of the IVM, and then how that relates to the six faces, just vital. 204.

Since the cube-faced diagonal is the edge of the six-vector-edged four-planes-of-symmetry tetrahedron, and since synergetics finds the unit-vector-edge tetrahedron to be the simplest structural system in the universe, the tetrahedron's vector edge logically becomes the most economically primitive simplex module of relative length in synergetics coordinate systems of explanatory reference.

Thus, the tetrahedron's unit vector edge of unity 2 is manifest as nature's coordinate primitive length module for assessing second power triangular area, 2 to the second power equals 4, as well as assessing the vector's third power tetrahedral volume, 2 to the third power equals 8.

These areas and volumes become the logical unit of aerial and volumetric reference in accounting the relative geometrical area and volume values of the entire hierarchy of primitive concentrically congruent symmetrical polyhedra as these naturally occur around any vertex of the isotropic vector matrix.

and that matrix is experimentally demonstrable maximum limit set of seven axes of polyhedral symmetries which seven symmetries section 1040 accommodate and characterize the energetic special case formalization formulation of all great circle gritting so tied in a lot of tet ideas here but basically this part is saying the edge of the tet

should have a value of one.

This should be our point of reference.

Why would we make the edge of the cube value one?

Let's just call this one.

Now, if anyone says, well, you can't just choose, it's kind of like one inch versus one meter or one centimeter.

Like we can have the same ratios, but choose what one is going to be.

And then we're going to have this integration with Unity as plural and at minimum two to have the kissing spheres relationship.

So we're going to get first edge, second aerial, and third volumetric relationships scaled

relative to cube world because we're basing it off of the edge of the tet rather than the edge of the cube which as we've seen are inscribed in one another the tet is inscribed in the cube so this is kind of an interesting little disclosure by bucky 205.

The synergetics hierarchy of topological characteristics as presented in Table 223.64 of Synergetics I, which was contracted for with Macmillan in 61 and published by them in 1975, discloses the rational values of the comprehensive coordinate system of nature which my 60-year exploration discovered.

In 1944, I published a paper disclosing this rational system.

At that time, I was counseled by some of my scientist friends who were aware that I was continuing to make additional refinements in discovery.

That premature publication of a treatise of disclosure might result in the omission of one or more items of critical information which might later be discovered and which might make the difference between scientific acceptance or rejection of the disclosures.

Reminded by those scientist-artist friends that we only have one opportunity in a lifetime out of many lifetimes to publish a prime science reorienting discussion, I postponed publishing a comprehensive treatise until 1970.

At the age of 75, I felt it could no longer be delayed.

So this is kind of cool.

It's just like Bucky giving a little personal history here.

and saying that Synergetics One, giving a little timeframe here.

So it took 14 years from the book contract to the book being published for him to come out with Synergetics One with Ed Applewhite.

And then it's part of a 60 year journey and that he got feedback from scientists and artists and fusions of there above.

And then also that he sees

this synergetics hierarchy of the top logical characteristics to be his key contribution.

So that's pretty cool.

But there's more to say.

So Bucky, 206.

The 11th hour publishing of Synergetics I coincided with my busiest years of serving other obligations over a period calling for a vast number of tactical decisions regarding the methodology of producing what proved to be a 780-page book.

Typical of the problems to be swiftly resolved are those shortly to be herewith recounted.

The accounting also discloses the always surprisingly productive events that ensue upon mistake-making that are not only discovered and acknowledged, but are re-explored in search of the significance of the mistakes having occurred.

So this is just awesome, bucky, learning by doing, and just saying, yes, it was part of my 60-year mission, but also we totally rushed it out the door and we were learning by doing. 207.

Because the XYZ coordinate three-dimensional system values are arrived at by successive multiplying of the dimensions, volume in that system is inherently a three-dimensional phenomenon.

But in synergetics,

The primitive values start holistically with a timeless-sizeless tetrahedral volume unity in respect to which the cube's primitive value is 3, the octahedron's relative timeless-sizeless value is 4, the rhombic trichontohedrons is 5, and the rhombic dodecahedrons is 6.

In synergetics, when time-size special case realizations enter into the consideration, then the only interrelated to one another primitive volumes of the synergetic hierarchy are multiplied by the frequency of the edge modulation to the third power.

Since innate primitive volume is a base times altitude three-dimensional phenomenon, and since all the synergetics hierarchy time-size realization volumes are inherently six-dimensional,

was confronted with an exploratory tactical quandary absolutely thrilling what is his tactical quandary the problem 208 was to arrive at the numerical volume value for the sphere in the synergetics hierarchy and the dilemma was whether i should apply my synergetics volumetric constant to the first power or the third power

of the XYZ's coordinate system's volumetric values, as arrived at by the conventional XYZ coordinate system's method of calculating the volume of a sphere of radius vector equals 1.

This operation is recorded in section 982.55 of Synergetics 1, where I misconceptualized the operation, and without reviewing how I had calculated the constant for converting XYZ to synergetics,

redundantly took the number 1.192324, which I assumed, again in mistaken carelessness, to be the third power value of the synergetic conversion constant.

and I applied it to the volumetric value of a sphere of unit vector diameter as already arrived at by conventional XYZ reference mathematics.

The conventional XYZ coordinate volumetric value for the volume of a sphere of radius 1 being 4.188, which multiplied by 1.192324, gave the product 4.99.

a value so close to 5 that I thought it might possibly have been occasioned by the unresolvability of tail-end trigonometric interpolations.

Wherefore, I tentatively accepted 4.99 as probably being exactly 5, which, if correct, was an excitingly significant number, as it would have neatly fitted the sphere into the hierarchy of primitive polyhedra .

My hindsight wisdom tells me that my subconscious demon latched tightly onto this five and fended off all subconsciously challenging intuitions.


UNKNOWN:
209.


SPEAKER_00:
But what I had mistakenly assumed to be the third power synergetics constant was in fact the ninth power of that constant, as will be seen in the following list of the synergetics constant raised to varying powers.

And here's that list.

1.192324 is S to the ninth.

And the value to the first is just 1.019.

And that third power is 1.06.

So a devastating disclosure by Bucky, but...

it's going to have interesting conclusions.

What is happening here?

So he's really walking through for himself and maybe for us about how he made a mistake that was just so vast and unambiguous and also how that relates to the way that the XYZ thinking pervades our thought.

So as in the previous slide,

The three-dimensional values of volume.

So like the cube having a volume of one.

So it has an edge length of one.

And then, wow, it has an area of one.

Oh, and it has a volume of one.

That is amazing.

That's the SI system.

However, volume is inherently three-dimensional.

And so there's some sort of third dimensional scaling relationship that's hidden in the cube, having both an edge length of one and a volume of one.

So in synergetics, when we renormalize volume to tet unity, we get some other relationships.

So Buggy's trying to do some calculations and he accidentally cubes the cube.

He's already working

in a way where you don't need to add this third power in, but he adds the third power in.

And so he gets up to the ninth power.

And so that then is confirmed by his belief that like integers are really cool.

So sometimes when he was very close to an integer, he would really latch onto it.

Not every time, but many times.

So Bucky makes a mistake in Synergetics 1 because how sweet it would be if spheres fit into this picture so cleanly.

210, skipping.

So 211.

Whatever the workings of my subconscious may have been, the facts remain that I had erroneously concluded that the five was the tetravolume of the sphere whose diameter was our unit vector, whose value was two.

In due course, I received a letter from a mathematician, Ramsay Campbell, whose conventional calculations seemed to show I was wrong, but I was not convinced that his conventional results were not also erroneous, insomuch that they had been cubically arrived at rather than tetrahedrally referenced.

So, you're computing in the wrong paradigm, bro.

You can't disprove me, says Bucky.


UNKNOWN:
212.


SPEAKER_00:
At this point, a young associate of mine, Robert Grip, who was convinced that I was misconvinced, and who knew that I would alter my position only as confronted by a physically demonstrable evidence, made a gallon-sized, water-holding tetrahedron in a sphere whose diameter was identical with the prime vector length of the tetrahedron's edge. 212.

The water content, the volume of the sphere was indeed 4.43 units, 0.57 less than five.

So that's classic Bucky getting that experimental demonstration right in front of his eyes of something and that updating his mind in a way that thoughts didn't.

And then the idea of like how many marbles or beans or water would fit in a shape, that kind of volume conservation is a really cool and it's a cool technique.

2, 1, 3.

The cubically arrived at spherical volume A of a sphere of diameter equal to the unit edge of the XYZ coordinate system's cube is 4.188.

To convert that spherical volume value A to that of sphere B, whose diameter is equal to the diagonal of the face of the XYZ system's cube, we multiply the volume of the sphere A by the synergetics hierarchy volumetric constant.

Okay, pause here.

So it's the difference between a sphere with a radius of 1 versus root 2.

So that's one world.

If you're in cube world, the edge is 1, and then the diagonal is root 2.

But if you're in tet world, where the tet is kissing spheres, and so unity is plural, and at minimum 2, so let's pick 2.

So its edge is 2.

And then if its edge were 1, this would be root 2 over 2, which a lot of trig students probably have seen.

But because the edge is 2, this is just 2.

So it's the difference between a sphere, again, that goes through this left point and this point.

That's with a cube's edge or with a tet edge.

What's the ratio of the volumes?

Well, you get it by the synergetics hierarchy volumetric constant, which is obtained by taking the synergetic unit VE vector linear constant 1.0198 and raising it to its third power or volumetric dimension, so that number cubed, which equals 1.0606.

Multiplying this XYZ system's cube edge-diametered A sphere's volume of 4.188

By the synergetics volumetric constant of 1.0606 gives us 4.4429, which is the sought-for volume of the sphere B. I thanked Mr. Campbell and acknowledged my error.

So it's kind of a cool story because it's like maybe the real synergetics was the truth we knew along the way because he had the right numbers, he had all the right intel, but he got so locked in with that integer value

but then when he just did it right and had it presented to him analytically and physically, he came around.

I then said to my mathematical associates, Robert Grip and Chris Kittrick, that there is no single item that more effectively advances research than the unblocking of our thought processes through experiential evidence of a previously held erroneous assumption.

Wherefore my intuition told me that my error may have been stubbornly clung to, because there might have been something very important to be discovered in this region of investigation, there is possibly some enlightening significance in the fact I had intuitively applied, and again forsaking the first correction, had doubly reapplied, my third power synergetics conversion factor to an already three-dimensional cubic volume quantation measurement.

which on the occasion of these retreatments had erroneously seemed to me to be as yet three powers short of the minimum primitive realizable somethingness.

Why did I think as I did?

Why was I puzzled?

I was not confused about arithmetical operations per se.

We conventionally arrive at the area of a square by multiplying the square's edge length by itself, and we arrive at the volume of a cube by multiplying its edge length times itself twice, that is, we identify the square's area by the second power of its edge length, and we identify a cube's volume by the third power of its edge length.

All that seems simple and clear, until we discover that the cube does not exist and cannot exist until it has at least three other observable attributes, weight, duration, and temperature.

Given the quantitative inputs for those coordinate factors, the cube as yet fails to exist because as calculated, it is now solid.

And physics has discovered and proven that no such solid phenomenon exists.

Wherefore the cubical domain has to be substantially populated by atoms, which have a variety of interspacing and interpositioning behavioral patterns.

So pretty fascinating way to conclude that little story.

Bucky tricks himself.

He pranks himself.

He didn't take the already cubic dimensional scaling relationships into account.

Silly Bucky.

and it is at the very heart of some of the deepest questions for example if we want to have the french revolution SI system so one centimeter on the edge it's one centimeter cubed of volume it has one gram of water it has one area of centimeter squared on painting that's the cube world when we take the plunge into tet world

not just do the values change, not just do one need to be rescaled and area and volume, but the scaling relationship changes because the surface area to volume of different shapes is different.

So the scaling relationships between a number and the number times itself and the number times itself a second time, the first, second, and third power relationships, those relationships need to be

But as we talked about earlier, it's possible through triangulating and tetrahedronating numbers, you can get what you get out with squaring and cubing.

So it's a cultural preference.

Maybe it's one that favors one side or the other.

I think it's a discussion that's still ongoing.

But so fascinating how Bucky is emerging from the cubic paradigm, still makes legacy errors.

gets the experimental demonstration from an older and a younger colleague, the older colleague with a theory and the younger colleague with a practice, kind of like a Herman Hesse novel.

And then this more general point that when we rethink and reinterpret, that's when our research can advance the most.

And then Bucky investigating his own thought process and just realizing that

When you have a Tet-first world, you're getting at the essence and the kernel of structure.

Cubes, which can only exist as at least a tertiary derivation of a Tet world, which we talked about earlier, they must take on these different scaling relationships if you want it to make it make sense.

But also, in a Tet world, any cube is composite.

So it's going to have different relationships as well.

So...

Just one more time to say that in a Tet world, the cube is the weirdo and vice versa.

And so there's some extremely dialectically interesting things happening in geometry and the conversation is still happening.

So that was Synergetics live stream number 12.

The themes and the spirits were reformat, partition, and listen.

We talked about the rhetoric to the Tet.

We looked at Richard Ramsey's awesome key ideas of Bucky.

Then we talked about the 15 of the infinite number of points around the rhetoric of the Tet.

And then talked about Synergetics 200, narrative exposition of spherical accommodation.

So I hope you enjoyed

enjoyed this time that you spent and uh appreciate the attention thanks for checking it out and let me know if you ever have any suggestions or comments or questions thanks bye