SPEAKER_03:
Okay, that looks a little better.

We're going to start with the 25-minute song by Michael Garfield, and then we will be having an organizer's introduction with some slides and interactive Jamboard, and following that, the rest of the activities are going to be interactive in Gather.

So, here's 25 minutes of Michael Garfield, and then we'll see you very soon.


SPEAKER_02:
Help me!


UNKNOWN:
Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

¶¶

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_03:
all right hello everyone greetings Yana how are you i'm doing good thanks for asking daniel how are you okay let me increase your volume a little bit yep it's a little late or early but i guess we're experimenting with the complexity of biphasic sleep here so

All right, let's go to the slides, walk through a little bit, say hello to those who are joining Complexity Weekend for the first time or rejoining, make some announcements, and then head over for most of this hour to the interactive Jamboard.

talk about whatever is interesting, and then that will conclude this opening live stream for the June 2022 Heartbeat.

The rest of the first interval and all of the second interval of activities will be in the Gather, which is in your calendar link.

This slide opening, the first part will consist of a welcome to Complexity Weekend.

And the second part will include some details on the June 2022 heartbeat itself.

Then we'll again go to the Jamboard.

So first, just a welcome and overview to the Complexity Weekend Community of Practice.

Here's some brief overview on the history of the events that Complexity Weekend has held.

So the first Complexity Weekend was in May 2019 in person in San Francisco.

And since then we've had one, two, three, four, five online weekends.

And these are cohort based weekends with participants coming from all over the world who

join for these online cohorts.

And there's a pre-weekend phase where people get more familiar with the tooling, the people and the ideas of Complexity Weekend.

And then during the weekend itself, there are, especially in these last several weekends, continuous activities.

So there's the opportunity to drop in and participate in sessions at whatever time of day or whatever availability someone has.

And we've had a bunch of teams forming each time and the teams seed and sprout during the weekend as well as before and after the weekend.

And so that's kind of the key rhythmic piece of Complexity Weekend as a community of practice moving forward are these cohort-based weekends.

Anything you want to add in here?


SPEAKER_01:
So we've got quite a lot of events planned and coming up and I'm looking forward to the talks on today.

But yeah, let's see how this goes.


SPEAKER_03:
Great.

Okay.

so in reference to those weekends just mentioned we can see those as being like these higher energy peaks that happen every six months or so so the last weekend that we had was april 22nd to 24th in 2022 and we're going to be heading into the september 23 to 25 weekend this next big peak

And then in the intervals between the weekends, these smaller peaks are the heartbeats.

That's what we're at today.

The heartbeats are informal drop-in opportunities to get a taste of Complexity Weekend and see kind of the platforms that we use for synchronous video connection and understand some of the activities and the types of sessions that we have.

And then also just

get a first taste or get a returning taste and learn about what's happening in the community, hear from people who are sharing about teams and opportunities to participate.

And then in the background is you and your team.

And that's because as we've played around increasingly and hope to bring into the slides,

there's a lot to be said about participation in a multi-scale community and there's the level of individual development as well as relations and the developments of small teams and then the team level is as far as applying complexity goes really important to keep in mind and so our

Multi-scale development with complexity is not completely captured just by the heartbeats or the weekends.

It's awesome when people do participate in them because it keeps the rhythm alive.

And then in the background, in the time between those energy peaks,

there's also of course whatever we're doing in the rest of our lives so it's kind of a fun way to check in with a global community of practice around complexity that does have this defined rhythm and also to in the times between take things however you see fit anything you want to add here


SPEAKER_01:
So this is always my favorite illustration of how we progress and continue with Complexity Weekend.

So

So I really like it that we have these heartbeats.

So we have a sense of continuity and we know that there's a monthly event and we can keep in touch with people.

And it's not even just about the heartbeat.

So everything sort of scales.

We keep in touch through Keybase and in our teams, and then we see once a month, and then we have these larger events

bi-annually.

So this chart shows generally how these relationships are formed and what are our peak moments in getting together and discussing complexity.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks.

The September weekend, this is a fun announcement, is actually now open for participants and for facilitators.

So for facilitators, please contact complexityweekend at gmail.com and we'll send you the information.

If you would be interested to be a facilitator for participants, we're using a new and hopefully simpler and more integrated participation registration approach.

So head over to complexityweekend.com and create a account if you haven't already.

So create a CW username, and that will be your unique permanent short username string.

So it's kind of like your CW identity.

And in the user portal, you'll see that the first question is asking you if you'd like to participate in the September weekend cohort.

So all you have to do is just select, yes, I'd like to participate.

And then there's a bunch of optional questions that you can also answer.

But it's easy to register as making an account at complexityweekend.com.

And then...

selecting, yes, I'd like to participate in this cohort.

So that's exciting.

It's kind of like a soft launch.

We'll be releasing more information in the coming days and weeks, but just wanted to announce that for those who are at the heartbeat,

and also request for these first people who are registering to let us know how the rsvp process is working and if they have any like questions or how it's going for them so this will be cool and different and it is using some of our updated tech affordances that we've been building in the tech committee

another representation of the ways that complexity weekend works is this kind of anatomy and physiology diagram with our community structure so the biggest circle here are the participants everyone is a participant and then there are some event specific roles that help us

make sure that the show goes on the road we have organizers and facilitators in an event specific capacity so like for a given heartbeat or weekend the two kinds of events that we provide and share together are the monthly heartbeats as well as the biannual weekend cohorts

There's also some other roles and some structures that make sure that we have sustainability and the ability to do the kinds of things with our community that we would like to.

So there's the associates and supporters who can provide financial and non-financial support for CW.

And then there are committees and teams.

And committees are a special kind of team

with a focus on Complexity Weekend itself and then the teams are formed by participants and embodied and enacted by them and applying complexity or in some way relating to complex systems of some type

inside, outside, on the interface of Complexity Weekend.

And so we try to provide the opportunities for those who want to be forming and joining teams to do so and where it's possible and preferable

There's the participant teams, and then there's also the special kind of participant teams with the committees.

And these are absolutely complexity teams.

There are teams that have a rhythm that Complexity Weekend scaffolds so that we can make sure to get things done that we need, but also they're a great opportunity for people who want to contribute to Complexity Weekend and learn by doing just as they would on a regular Complexity team.

So any thoughts on this?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so I think forming teams is also a great way to meet other people and work with people maybe you've never met before through your shared interests and values.

And then work together within and beyond the space of complexity weekend, which is the

The green bubble, I guess, of participants who make up the weekend.


SPEAKER_03:
Is there any way for your microphone to be a little louder, Jana?

Or just a little closer?


SPEAKER_01:
That's weird.

Okay, I'll just check the settings.


SPEAKER_03:
It's okay.

I can kind of make it mostly better, but just wanted to check.

But thanks.

That makes me think about...

making an animation or something and having teams kind of be mobile and start in the fold of Complexity Weekend and then kind of like take a journey and

learn things together so here are uh the events that are upcoming just to show the the previous and ongoing event the the heartbeats may june july and august so we'll have this june heartbeat and then we have the august and september or sorry july and august heartbeats

happening at the end of those months then the September cohort so that'll be the weekend itself with continuous activity on the 23rd to the 25th and then pre-weekend leading up to that

And then we'll have three heartbeats in October, November, and December.

Month 10, 11, 12.

And that will conclude 2022.

So, wow.

We're already halfway done with the year.

And it's going by fast.

And things are developing a lot.

Those are the events that we'll be having with CW.

Also, this slide here, or if you go to our Coda page, and I'll post that in the chat, you'll find the calendar link and you can add that to your own personal calendar.

here the committees are shown and so the committees have differential activity and so always feel free to email complexityweekend gmail.com if you'd like to contribute actively to any of the committees but there's a lot of opportunities on a weekly basis with synchronous meetings at different times and also with

many, many open asynchronous opportunities for anybody who wants to contribute to Complexity Weekend in a more technical capacity, like with the .tech committee, or to contribute in various other ways, like thinking about the team's experience, contributing art,

working with outreach and so on.

So there's a lot of different committee committees where people can be learning complexity and also contributing to making CW a thriving community.

Anything you want to add here?


SPEAKER_01:
Is the audio better now?


SPEAKER_03:
It's kind of the same, but it's it works.


SPEAKER_01:
OK.

We'll do a test later.

So

So working with CODA, and we can here see all the teams and the committee or other committees that help coordinate Complexity Weekend.

So if any of these are something you'd like to learn how to do,

or you have proficiency in or something in between, then it's worthwhile jumping in on Keybase and having a chat and seeing if there's something you could contribute or learn from.


SPEAKER_03:
Awesome.

Briefly, we'll look at some of the values that, just considering Complexity Weekend as a complex system, provide that kind of alignment and coordination amongst our participation.

And those are what brings us all together and our collective purpose, our core values, and our participation guidelines.

So I'll head over to this Coda page, which I'll also post in the YouTube live chat.

and on the top bar head over to where it says participation guidelines and values so uh here we have the values and just while i'm cropping up i will just show it like this um we have i'll read them and then yana feel free to add one note we have we learn complexity science by doing we surf through deep time and we include to innovate


SPEAKER_01:
I think that's pretty complete for now.

Nothing else comes to mind.

But if something does, we can certainly add it.


SPEAKER_03:
Awesome.

And all of these sections of text and lists were generated collectively and through a lot of feedback with prior versions of the documents.

The purpose of Complexity Weekend is to build deep time community, to grow multi-scale networks, and to apply complexity.

And then we have a bunch of values provided here, and I posted the link in the YouTube live chat for people who want to read it in a little more detail.

Over at the participation guidelines tab, there are some

Participation suggestions and pointers.

So for example, complexity weekend is a complex system across multiple scales.

Adopt a complexity thinking mindset.

Communication is key for relationships and teams.

Show respect.

Embrace technology, but know its limits.

And full participation, whatever that means for you.

Anything that you would add in here?


SPEAKER_01:
Um, this point, no, and I'm not exactly a morning person, so I'm sorry.

I'm still waking up a little bit.


SPEAKER_03:
Um, no worries.

I'm falling asleep a little bit.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

We'll muddle through.

Sorry, everybody.

But, uh, I hope you're, you're keeping up with us, even though we're not totally awake here today.


SPEAKER_03:
It's the fun of an all time zones, global community.

So kind of return to the slides and hide into this second part of the slides on the heartbeat itself.

Okay, so here is the program for the June 2022 Heartbeat, and I'll post the link in the live chat as well, but it's available in the same coda as the values and guidelines were.

And just to kind of look at the program here, we're in this opening live stream at 8 UTC.

after this live stream we're going to head over to gather where the rest of all activities are going to be and there's going to be a one-on-one session Yana is going to facilitate and the one-on-one sessions are like unstructured conversations we remix through multiple conversations and so you have a great opportunity to connect with different complexity weekend participants who are also there

Then we will have a facilitated session by Jakob Smeckel on exploring complexity with agent-based modeling in Active Blockference.

So that's going to be a pretty cool computational, but also very accessible and interactive approach to agent-based modeling using the Active Inference framework.

And then the final hour of the first interval is going to be a spotlight talks session, which is like an opportunity for whoever's there to share an up to five minute spotlight talk and having like a shared sense making whether the person wants to just surface an idea that's coming to mind or they want to talk about a project or a challenge they've been having.

These are always awesome emergent experiences.

In the second interval,

There's an optional hangout in Gather if you want.

Sometimes there's people there, other times, sometimes not.

Then at 0 UTC, we'll begin the second interval with another one-on-one session.

It's a different set of people, so people are always joining and leaving these sessions and very few will be able to make both intervals because the times are very different from both.

So we kind of increase the global accessibility of at least joining one session this way.

After the one-on-one sessions to begin the second interval,

we'll have a facilitated session by Chandra Chawla, Complexity and Startup Decision Making.

And I actually co-organized a complexity event in downtown Palo Alto with Chandra about

five years ago on blockchain and complexity.

So it's really awesome to see Chandra get involved here with Complexity Weekend and continuing his journey with facilitating complexity and using it in a decision-making context.

In the third hour, we'll have another spotlight talks and discussion section.

And so again, whoever's there, different set of people, there will be five minute spotlight talks or just sharings.

And then in the rest of the hour, we usually just hang out and continue the conversation around those ideas.

The last hour of the first interval is going to be Ahmed Fahad's session, three points contextualization.

So Ahmed was a facilitator at a previous Complexity Weekend cohort.

And so now he's stepping up to be a facilitator and bringing some of his expertise with the Kinevan framework.

And so this should also be an awesome session.

So this is a...

a really exciting program.

We have opportunities for connection and for emergent interactions amongst participants, and then also a bunch of facilitators who are bringing different perspectives from different areas and coming together to do something interactive with participants.

So anything to add on the program, Jana?


SPEAKER_01:
I think to just summarize, so the theme for today's heartbeat is pathways to decision-making.

So maybe that's something we can all keep in mind a little bit, like the way we form our thoughts and what connections we make and where do they lead to and how predictable are they?

or not.

And to look at those patterns of sense making and decision making.


SPEAKER_03:
Yes.

Awesome.

Let's return to that in the Jamboard just in a few minutes.

And then just to continue on with the slides.

So the Heartbeat organizers were myself and Jana.

So Jana, thanks for the awesome work as always.

Heartbeat co-organizing is a collaborative process.

So if anybody is interested to join,

co-organizing they're absolutely welcome to do so many different ways of contributing so if you're interested in organizing at all or you'd like to even just find out a bit more what it's about then email complexity weekend at gmail.com there are again many ways to do this and you will not be

Hopefully overburdened or stressed.

This is like a chill organizing process.

We hang out, we have fun, we share tasks clearly, and we work on kind of a consensual organizing basis that again keeps it like fun and educational and also make sure that the event is organized.

The rest of the activities are going to be in Gather.

And so on the live stream, I'm screen capping Gather right now.

And so in the main menu, these grapes on the bottom left, you can always change different settings that you're using, like which microphone or camera you're using.

You can change some other settings here if anything's going weird.

The bottom bar, there's a personal menu.

You can change what your character looks like in Gather.

You can also add a text status like, hello.

You can edit your name in the atrium, which is the CW public space, if you'd like to.

Here are the microphone and camera.

So you can there mute or turn off your camera phone and camera.

So you can there mute or turn off your camera.

The smiley face allows you to make reactions or to raise your hands.

You can share your screen.

And so gathers a spatial chat platform that has all the features of a video chat platform.

And that's where all the interactive events are going to be for the rest of the intervals.

Anything else to add there?


SPEAKER_01:
And I think in general, I don't know if you said this, Daniel, but at the bar or cafe, usually somebody is around there or on the green mat.

So if you're

you're feeling a little lost or you don't know how something works, you can try find somebody there.

The green map is like when you go up the screen and there's a pathway.

You can usually find somebody there because that's where the events are.

And also you can always put a message in the chat.

Just make sure you set it to, I think it was, is it global?

Oh, we don't have a global chat yet.


SPEAKER_03:
It's room.

And also on the bottom right, if you go to the people, like where there's four people here now, you can always right click on somebody and like follow them.

So if you see anyone else there, you can just follow and your avatar runs over to find them.

So that can be useful if you don't know where somebody is, but you want to find where they are.

Okay.

And just like complexity, we always say with Gather, just jump in, get involved, ask questions, and you'll figure it out very quickly.

Okay.

um we use coda for a lot of our interactive shared documents and so a lot of the links that i've already shared in the chat are to a public coda page which is not an editable one but it's still lightly interactive like you can search and so on and for the weekend cohort we use coda as our shared knowledge management so it's a awesome document system

and for the weekend it's used for knowledge management but for the heartbeat we use it more for the program and for other things and last note before we head over to the jam board your support in complexity weekend is priceless and invaluable so your participation as well as feedback and word of mouth recommendations are some of the best ways to support complexity weekend

You can always direct any colleagues or networks to go to complexityweekend.com where people can always find updated information on events and ways to participate.

Other ways to support Complexity Weekend include joining a committee and or helping co-organize any upcoming event.

Also, if you'd like to, you can financially support Complexity Weekend.

And those contributions go towards supporting future events, as well as all the kinds of infrastructure that we're building at CW and eventually things like

grants for teams, and so on.

But for now, primarily the Gatherer bandwidth, the Facilitator honorariums, and the infrastructural updates to Complexity Weekend.

So with all this being said, let's head over to the Jamboard.

I will repost the link in the YouTube live chat.

So feel free to...

I'll head over to the Jamboard and repost it in just a second, but feel free to watch the live stream where I'll be sharing the Jamboard or jump in there yourself and make some changes.

So while I'm cropping and posting, Yana, do you want to just describe like anything about interacting with Jamboard?


SPEAKER_01:
Essentially, it's a sticky note space.

But unfortunately, you cannot make hyperlinks.

Of course, you can paste links in there, and people need to copy paste them to use them.

So just keep that in mind.

And make use of the colors, because it does help to

see the information and perhaps make connections between ideas through color matching if we want to try that otherwise just it's nice to have it all colorful and have all the different ideas and thoughts thoughts there great so yeah let's um for 20 or so minutes play around on the jam board


SPEAKER_03:
And then we'll take a short break before adjourning the live stream and heading over to Gather where the rest of the activities will be, specifically the one-on-ones.

And so at the very top bar, I'm going to click on the next frame to head over to frame two.

So we start with an empty page.

And sorry, getting hopeless.

Wow, aren't we all hopelessly confused sometimes?

But you've added a post-it.

That's amazing.

So anonymous post-it-er, great work.

Let's go into the hopeless confusion and also keep that...

theme which was pathways to decision making yana exactly so what do we do when we're hopelessly confused what does complexity have to do with the experience of being confused and how does complexity help step into that moment and help us address it differently than we might


SPEAKER_01:
Maybe it's also about just making that first step and seeing where it goes.

Because sometimes doing nothing can be very disabling.

And so it's maybe sometimes just about doing something and then from there figuring out what's the next step.


SPEAKER_03:
Awesome.

Yes.

I mean, again, we can laugh and it's awesome that the person has posted it this way, but it's so true that faced with confusion in all of these ambiguities that we might be dealing with, like an online community of practice, perhaps joining a community of practice for the first time,

dealing with complexity, complexity science, which is an area that could have a lot of intrinsic uncertainty, just in terms of what is being described, even just at the theory level.

And that's before we even get into the applied complexity and the practice.

How do we apply complexity?

These are questions where there isn't just a handbook or some recipe that we can follow.

So

those who are getting hopelessly confused you're not alone and you're in the right place especially when you've signaled it so clearly like that so this is kind of a fun first step and then i guess where do we go so as some people in the community already know i i do some kind of crochet artwork and


SPEAKER_01:
this helps me attend to each stitch um instead of always looking at the big problem which of course you need to have some idea of what it is you're making or not you could just improvise but attending to just that next stitch that you need to do the next step the next thought and

And that, for me, is really helpful in moving forward.


SPEAKER_03:
So, confusion may be normal, but I don't know what to ask with a question mark.

Well, to anyone who wants to be continuing to collaborate and just stigmatically modify this document,

What do you want to ask?

What do you want to resolve your uncertainty about?

They wrote in the live chat, am I the only person here?

Does anyone know that I'm here?

Are you the only person here?

Unless that's some kind of cosmic query, no.

There are other people watching the live stream and interacting with this Jamboard.

right now and we also have people who rewatch the live stream and so it's potentially a small set of people there's not a thousand people watching this live stream but you're not the only one does anyone know that i'm here i don't know who you mean by who would know but i know yana knows

That's at least two people.

That's a lot.

If I don't know what to ask, I don't know what to ask.


SPEAKER_01:
I run into this all the time.

So, yeah, it takes me sometimes forever to think of a question or for one question to even kind of pop up.

At least it feels like that way to me.

Um, and it often is dependent on the circumstance of course, or if I'm comfortable with the topic.

Um, so maybe if, if we don't have a question yet, um, maybe we just need to listen until one comes and listen to somebody else or read somebody else's thoughts and ideas.

And then the questions will, will usually arise.

Um,

But also I find when somebody answers a question for me, it's not always satisfying.

And so somehow interacting with content or material can sometimes be more meaningful than an immediate answer to a question.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks, that makes me think about how we can come to a complex system.

We as complex systems and engaging in that relationality, we can consider

bringing a question to the system, like to the Oracle, asking a question or having some question that we're seeking to resolve through our participation in a community.

Like, what can I learn about X?

Or what are new ways to do X?

Or some sort of explicit or even implicit question that's bringing us to interact with that complex system.

Like,

I pulled the slot machine lever and I want to know if it's going to reward me.

And then there's also this contemplative mode based around interacting and engaging with the system, but it isn't

question-driven.

It's almost like curiosity in its more narrow, focused sense is about something.

Like being curious, again, to resolve something that one is wondering about, but then also there's this open-endedness of just engaging and being there, which is absolutely respectable and honorable and essential.

If it's just people

bringing questions and dumping them into a common ground it can be one kind of special experience but also a lot of times having people and having modes of just being able to soak it in digest it and kind of ferment it and let it um just take one in the way that they're being

felt to move it's kind of a different mode of engaging that isn't as question driven but still has elements of curiosity and of engagement so maybe also we can think like what other ways are there to


SPEAKER_01:
participate without necessarily even needing a question.

Yeah, so... So that's... maybe that's something we can also figure out, like how do you... how do you go to the next iteration or the next moment and just sit with the information that you have and see what comes from that?

without necessarily needing a question.


SPEAKER_03:
So we have active listening.

Positive additions.

For example, maybe somebody who is, and this could be related to Complexity Weekend as a complex system, but I'm also imagining like, how can we participate in a thunderstorm other than questions or like in a tide pool?

can listen to the tide pool we could make some positive addition or rearrangement immersion jump in the pool you can monitor the pool maybe you get some data from it someone has written

then you may well not get interaction and remain unchanged yeah feel free to like add more or unpack that but it's very interesting like the way in which we engage and interact is kind of like the volume knob on how we change and there's ways of engaging where we can hold the cards close to the chest

and maybe engage a little bit or even engage a lot, but still remain mostly unchanged.

And there's other times where we could engage in a way that actually is transformative.

Here's a fun question.

Yana, I'd be curious to hear your thoughts.

What is the difference between complexity thinking and systems thinking?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, we've had some discussions on this, I think last year and on Keybase.

So at least from where I'm sitting, it feels complexity is a bit more based on measurements and computational simulations and systems thinking

perhaps a bit more holistic.

It's more about the wholes rather than the parts.

But of course they are interdependent and there's a lot of overlap.

So this is not necessarily mutually exclusive.

But that's sort of the

the feeling that complexity thinking is a bit more analytical and systems thinking has a more holistic and complete feeling looking at like whole systems or ecologies.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks.

So I'll give a thought.

Um,

would just note that this is a really important question as so many are and we we open some threads on the short format of the live stream and then like we're there to unpack this over the years to come what is the difference in theory and in practice quite literally in education and research and in application so um

Complexity thinking and systems thinking, as Jana mentions, from a conceptual perspective,

and from just a community perspective like the people who might be engaged in one or the other they probably have more and similar than dissimilar someone's written i've thought of complex systems as a subset of systems so that's totally an awesome perspective we we hear about complex systems and so it's an adjective it sounds like complex is adding something to specify systems

The idea that there are complex systems implies that there might be like simple systems and an alternate perspective on complexity is like it's a mode of engaging with systems

such that it isn't that we're going around in the world and tagging systems as simple or complex, but it's in the way that we're choosing to engage or consider different systems.

Like, is a double pendulum a simple system or a complex system?

It has few elements, but it also is engaging in chaotic behavior and so on.

They, these two fields of complexity and systems have intertwined, but some different influences.

So like Jana mentioned also, complexity does have a connotation of bringing in sometimes more of like a computational or a simulation based approach, but they both absolutely deal with many of the same themes and memes.

many of the same insights and even methodologies.

So they're cousins or closer.

And especially in Complexity Weekend, where we've made every effort at every event to highlight diverse approaches to complexity and art and philosophy and those who have more of a formal background or less of a formal background.

I think of complexity as a keyword that people are going to fill in with their own partial view of the elephant.

And so we come together around complexity because we need some search term, some keyword to come together around.

but to say that we're looking using a complexity perspective or studying systems it leaves the door open but provides a door frame in a sense complex systems are possibly systems in which everything is responding and modifying itself in response to others

I love that with the thing in quotes.

In Active Inference we also kind of sometimes put thing in quotes to emphasize that like everything is like each one of the things and then they also constitute some bigger or different thing.

And that's where we start to come to topics like emergence and like collective behavior, themes that pop up again and again in systems and complexity.

And an example about how different themes can have a qualitative on-ramp.

There's important discussions to be had by considering different ideas qualitatively.

And then there's also

the ability to elaborate those concepts and use them in a more formal or mathematical way as well.

And not for every person at every time, but it's awesome to be part of a community and a field of practice where we can engage with ideas in different ways

that includes like thinking about composite systems or reflexive systems cybernetic systems modification of the environment all of those things and to be able to approach them again qualitatively as well as using like more formal and computational methods what else does that make you think about well I


SPEAKER_01:
Maybe to go a little bit back, I wanted to also talk about scaling and resolution.

And the way I see it is that maybe on the immediate first glance, something could look quite simple and trivial, or like you said, with the pendulum, its components seem quite

Quite simply, a lot of people could make a pendulum with some basic materials.

But the interaction of a pendulum, if you want to calculate it or you want to make a simulation, then you discover the complexity.

So it sort of depends on how far you want to zoom in to a problem or a space or an interaction.

And you can always find complexity depending on the scale and resolution that you're engaging with.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks.

Someone has written in orange here.

Do complex systems have some common properties?

For example, unpredictability, possibility of rapid change, emergence, etc.

Not present in simple systems.

It is a super important project.

to characterize a lot of the features that people use in association with complex systems many of them you've linked here but there's also other ones there's structural aspects of systems like people describe how they consist of multiple parts or they have dense or sparse connections there's the functional aspects of complex systems like their behavior like are being described here

There's the relational aspects of complex systems, like unpredictability is about the relationship of an observer or a modeler to the system.

It's not an intrinsic system attribute.

And so, again, the structural, the functional, the relational, these are all

domains of attributes of complex systems and so again it's not like we're sticking post-it notes on the real world and saying what is or isn't a complex system but rather when we make it clear how we're using complex system in a certain situation

then there's amazing discussions to have.

And I think this would be a great project or team around documenting the different uses and descriptions of what different kinds of complex systems are.

Sean, one of the co-founders of CW is always very fond of bringing it to particulars and saying like complexity is so vast and so general.

that it helps to have some particular system in mind and that helps provide like focus and alignment for the team and the individual but also balances and complements the generality with also thinking about the particular features of a specific system but these are really awesome ideas and they're things that a lot of us have probably wondered about too

So it's cool to think about like, how can we make that taxonomy so that there is something to, like a tool or rubrics to explore.

not in the spirit of tagging systems as complex or not, but like as a way for us to understand what is complexity even mean?

Is it about the system?

Like anything structural or functional?

Or is it about the way that we might be approaching something from a transdisciplinary perspective?

Like we're gonna approach that pendulum from a mechanics perspective, or we're gonna approach it from a supply chain, or a cultural perspective, or a symbolic perspective.

that's not even about the structure or the function of the pendulum.

That's about like the way that the individual and the team is able to bring different perspectives to the picture.

And so that's also a very important aspect of complexity.

Do you have any kind of closing-ish thoughts, Jana?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I think that's kind of also the point with technologies.

they don't exist in isolation.

So even simple, what we might consider a simple system is never in isolation.

It's always interdependent with other systems around it supporting it.

So

So I think this is a great point to move forward that we can consider while we might have some very specific mechanisms or functions for technologies or even things that we do ourselves, but they're always interdependent with other actors, environments, people, spaces.

So what we do and the things that we look at are never in isolation.


SPEAKER_03:
Awesome.

That's a great closing note.

So we'll close this short and fun live stream and keep a lot of these

ideas and questions alive and open and resonating with us because i really appreciate everybody who added things i posted in the youtube chat the gather link and also you'd find the gather link in the program or in the calendar event the rest of activities it would have a nice to have a record of what you just said but that's probably too complicated to put to the space

Well, thankfully, live streams are recorded, so you can always rewatch all of the amazing things that Yana says.

The rest of the activities are in the gather atrium and they're not recorded, at least in the same way as live streams are.

So, um, head over, take a few minute break and, um, Yana will be facilitating the one-on-one sessions starting in just a couple of minutes.

So again, thanks to everybody who joined this kind of like opening, uh,

just thinking like trumpets kind of opening tip of the iceberg but it is a welcoming and so welcome to everybody looking forward to seeing you at the rest of the activities in the heartbeat so see you later see you everyone see you on the green carpet