SPEAKER_01:
hello everyone out there this is the complexity weekend november 2020 heartbeat event on november 21st starting about at 10 a.m pst for the live stream for the next 25 minutes just to get in the mood we're going to hear an awesome composition slash performance from one of our previous complexity weekend facilitators michael garfield

All right, Michael, take it away in replay, and we'll see you all in about 25 minutes for the live stream.


UNKNOWN:
Oh, man!

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Music Music

Thank you.

so

Thank you.

Oh.

Thank you.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_04:
Bye.


UNKNOWN:
music music


SPEAKER_01:
Hello and welcome everyone to Complexity Weekend.

Welcome to our November 2020 Heartbeat event.

It is November 21st at 10 a.m.

PST.

I'm Daniel Friedman.

I'm a co-organizer at Complexity Weekend and I'm here with a co-organizer, Shirley.

Shirley, go ahead and introduce yourself.


SPEAKER_05:
Hi, I'm glad to be here and

I think it'll be a great day.

So thanks for joining us.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Yep.

We're really excited to see where we take it today.

So with that, I will move to the slide deck and I will start to the beginning of the slide deck, too, and then go through the first half of today's little introductory session and then pass it over to Shirley.

There'll be two main components to this introductory discussion by the organizers.

First, it's going to be a welcome to the Complexity community of practice, just about who we are, as well as some purpose, values, and guidelines of our community.

And then the second part of this short talk will be from Shirley about today's Heartbeat event and about Gather, which is how we're going to be interacting with each other.

So let's get into it with our community of practice.

Initial conditions are very important for complex systems, and Complexity Weekend is no different.

Our initial conditions began in May 2019 with an in-person hackathon in downtown San Francisco.

During the planning process for our second hackathon, we decided to go online due to the circumstances at the beginning of 2020.

And since then, we've had two online hackathons and several heartbeat events.

In May and October were our two big weekend hackathons that really emphasized team formation.

So what is the Complexity Weekend community?

What is the structure through space and through time of who it is in the community?

Well, there's a bunch of different roles in our community, and the biggest circle is just participant.

We're all participants here.

That being said, there are specific roles that we all step up into or step into performing at different times in our complexity journey.

So there are the organizers who plan logistics for events.

There are the core organizers who serve across hackathons.

There's also facilitators, and those are the individuals who have a background in applied or theoretical complexity and really bring that knowledge and experience to our community during the hackathons.

Then there are associates and supporters who are external entities who partner with us.

Really importantly, though, are the entry points for participants into the community.

And there's two main ways in, and that is through the biannual weekend hackathon cohorts.

So the previous one being in October 2020, the next one being in May 2021.

And these are really exciting full weekend events where we welcome many people into the community.

And then the second route on the bottom left there are the monthly heartbeat events.

So that's what you're at right now.

And that's, we hope, a little bit of a shorter introduction to the ideas and the perspectives and the people, because that's what it's all about.

And we use Keybase as a text back end at this point.

We didn't emphasize it for the heartbeat event because it's not a prerequisite to participating in this event.

But we do have a public Keybase team you can see here.

Cool.

Complex systems are also about different representations.

So here's a representation of our community through time.

And we can see this y-axis representing kind of excitement and progress and learning and these big bumps around the hackathons in October and May.

And then the smaller bumps at the heartbeat, which you're at right now.

And then also in the background, progressing through time is your team.

Yep, Shirley, what do you want to add there?


SPEAKER_05:
I'm sorry, I don't see the slides advancing.


SPEAKER_01:
It's all good.

Let me, sorry about that.

Yes, now you will see the slides advancing.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
So this is not registration information for the current Heartbeat event, but for our previous hackathon.

And there were 35 or more countries represented.

We had about 30% from the US and many, many other places represented so many different sectors and backgrounds.

We asked people to tell us what skills and ideas and perspectives they hope to bring to the table when they're solving complex problems.

And there's everything from the qualitative to the quantitative things to dove into more another time.

But just to give another important

dimension of variability in our community.

We ask people about their background and their level of familiarity with complexity science, and consistently at many of our events, around a third of people are just complexity beginners, complexity curious.

That's awesome.

As you can see from this word cloud, we have representation from academic, nonprofit, creative, science, design, students, business.

These are all different areas that complexity bears upon.

It's really awesome to see that we have all these different views here.

Well, that sounds like a lot of variation amongst different people.

What is it that brings us all together?

And there's a few things, and of course, another time we can go into it more, but our purpose and what brings us all together can be summarized as we all have a shared purpose and interest in complexity science.

We all desire to have impact on co-creative teams and improve our community through feedback and participation.

And we also all respect the core values and the process of following the community guidelines.

Let's talk about purpose and then some of those guidelines.

So on the purpose side, just a few of our collective purposes, which we have a document with more information for those who want to iterate on it and read a little bit more.

But a few of our purposes are to learn complexity science by doing, to serve through deep time,

and that we include to innovate and that diversity is key in that respect so we hope that through experiencing the community and all the activities that we have lined up and happening now that you actually see that we're trying to implement these things in a learning by doing way ourselves and it's the feedback from participants and the co-organization from awesome participants like shirley and others that really helps us make this happen

Our core values are also in that document, which anyone can request to see at this point.

And just a few of them, Complexity Weekend is itself a complex system.

This always keeps complexity as our number one priority and aim.

We also value that education is an active process and that we learn complexity science by doing.

We believe in teams and relationships.

Teamwork makes the dream work.

Another value is that participation means the importance of accessibility and inclusion for everybody.

We also believe that respect is key and we welcome our participants to step up and be brave because we're all learning these wild topics and trying to have impact on different systems.

So let's be there for each other.

Let's really give a plus one when people step up and be brave and encourage ourselves to do the same.

And lastly, on this sort of whirlwind complexity weekend values, which another time it'd be great to have more discussion on, are just a few of our participation guidelines for today and in general.

So first,

Always remember that the team and the individual is a complex system.

Again, it keeps complexity as our number one aim, and it helps us respect things like work-life balance or time zones, the difference between synchronous and asynchronous co-working, health, balance.

So let's just keep all of these perspectives in mind, a really broad understanding of what it means to have the... Sorry, one second.

what it means to be basically fully participating in our event.

Next would be adopt a complexity thinking mindset.

So just again, with yourself, relations and teams, try to think about complexity as just something that you can embody and find accessible in your life.

Communication is key.

That means the relations as well as the teams, the things that you have agency and that you can have control over.

And then importantly, embrace technology, but know its limits.

It's really special that we can participate in these international communities.

There's little road bumps along the way, lag and the friction, but let's try to use good audio and visual behavioral etiquette

and give our fullest participation so that we can surmount those challenges and really take advantage of how these special formats can be rewarding for our communities.

So with that, and just before the 10 minute mark, I will pass it to Shirley, who will tell us about the organizers for this event and then go through Gather and the importance of that technology.

So Shirley, thanks and take it away.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks, Daniel.

So we, of course, are the organizers or co-organizers for today's event.

And I'm really glad to be joining, I think, one of the outcomes or emergent outcomes of the October hackathon, which was my first introduction to the Complexity Weekend community.

One of the outcomes was that I

join as a co-organizer for this event.

And so, you know, completely unanticipated, not predictable at all.

I heard about this event and jumped right in.

So here I am.

And it's been wonderful to join the team and to learn more about the platform that we're using, as well as so many other aspects of creating together and supporting a community.

Can you go to the next slide, Daniel, please?

So, you know, speaking about the platform, this is obviously we are meeting or will meet soon on the Gather platform, video calling platform.

And we had a great time designing and customizing this space, putting little surprises here and there.

hopefully everyone has the link that was sent out in an email, uh, to people who are registered.

Um, and you know, we'll talk more about how to do this or how to use the platform.

Um, and you know, if you, if you have any questions, you can post in Keybase or you can find, um, Daniel, uh, or myself, um,

ask us questions, but we'll go through some of the specifics.

So let's look at the landscape map on the next slide.

So here we have actually the full space.

And I think it's great to have this larger view because when you're obviously in the space, you don't have that.

So, you know, get acquainted.

So basically you'll follow the link and you will spawn.

be created as an avatar and you can give yourself a name at the spawn point, which is where the poster Complexity Weekend is.

And around the room, you'll find an info booth, which has the schedule.

You'll find the different areas for the lightning talks and the posters.

And then they're actually surrounding the space or around the perimeter.

are open coworking spaces with whiteboards that you can go with people you meet or your team or whatever and have chats and get out the whiteboard and start, you know, even drawing away.

And I will note also that outside, well, outside in this space is a beach where we will have Palma Strand leading a workshop or an activity, relational activity,

on the yoga mats.

And then we have a few doors in this space to some fun spaces where you can play games.

There's an adventure room.

And then I think that's the main, oh, a bar as well in the middle.

So I think that'll basically cover it.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Do you want to go to the final notes on Gather?


SPEAKER_05:
Yes, please.

So, again, you know, this is a video platform, so there's some etiquette.

We'd love you to have your video on so people can attach a name to your avatar.

Mute when you're not talking.

And if something goes wrong with your feed, reload the page because sometimes things happen.

So, anyway, this space will be available at the same URL, excuse me, URL.

to drop in and have meetings with teammates or other community of practice participants.

I think we're good on Gather.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Yep.

And in the beginning, right after the live stream section, when we have that first five minute talk about how to use Gather, we'll talk about how to mute and unmute, how to walk around with arrow keys, et cetera.

But that's good for Gather.

So that is the how of today's podcast.

event is going to be primarily on gather so the first part is public that's the part that's on this live stream and then the part that's on gather is the all interactive part so if you're watching live stream if you have access to the program if you're in the gather that's a hundred percent of what you need to be doing right now

let's go to the event schedule and talk about the what not just the how and this is a little bit small but everybody in their email should be able to see the link and interact with this document so

The event started with a one hour warmup from nine to 10 AM PST, just to hang out and gather and get your audio and visual prepared and just meet other people.

It might be nighttime for them.

It might be morning for you.

We are currently in the 10 AM to 10 20 AM section of the live stream where the organizers of this event and everything is very event and project

oriented here the organizers for this event are literally the organizers for this event uh there's no other um side streams then um from 10 20 to 10 40 a.m so just a couple minutes from now we will have claudius van wick present uh some awesome thoughts and so many experiences about holism and complexity

From 10.40 a.m.

to 10.55, still on the live stream, we will have RJ give a talk on organizational sensemaking, which I am really looking forward to.

And then for the last section of the live stream, from 10.55 to 11.25 a.m., we're going to have a Jamboard session.

and that link will be posted in the youtube chat and also it can be found in the program and the jam board is kind of like a group post-it note application but it's going to allow us to just step in to answering some fun questions post what we're looking for what we can provide and just start seeing what it is that's out there in the complexity weekend community

We'll then take a quick bio break.

At 11.30 a.m.

PST for 50 minutes, we're going to have Paul Mestrand lead a Civity Mixer.

That's going to be a really fascinating relational activity as Shirley described it.

And we're just...

Really looking forward to it.

It's going to take advantage of some of the unique features of Gather, like the ability to do these remixable one-on-one conversations and also Palma's perspective on how the social and the relational and the complexity all come together with our behavior is just really unique and special.

From 1220 p.m., we're going to go a few different ways, a little bit more unstructured.

So right at 1220 to 1 p.m., there'll be poster sessions down on the bottom left side of the indoor section of the map.

But just feel free to walk around just like a regular poster session.

Go talk to the presenters or just see what's happening somewhere else.

From 1 to 1.30, we will also just be hanging out, exploring the gather space, talking to each other and unpacking, making some sense of what we had heard during the live stream, sharing the kinds of things that we're working on.

Then at 1.30 PM for 20 minutes, we are going to have lightning talks.

So these will be three minute talks that were solicited from the community and several people will present a three minute talk.

And we're just really looking forward to hearing about these projects, whether they started at a Complexity Weekend event or from a relationship that started at a CW event or not.

Everyone's projects and participation is just great how it is.

Then from 1.50 to 2 p.m.,

We will have a short organizers closing remarks in the center of the main gather space.

So those remarks will not be on a live stream like this.

They will be in the gather from a spotlight.

And that will also have some information about participation in future events and just kind of, again, starting to make a little sense of what is happening and where we're gonna go now in terms of our next heartbeat, as well as looking forward even into 2021 to our next hackathon.

And then after 2 p.m., really without end, the space is open.

The URL is there.

We'll adjust the kinds of settings, but you'll be in the loop if we do have to change settings in any respect.

And it's really just a space when

you want to drop in and just to be immersed in this spatial and relational and embodied approach that fuses the quantitative and the qualitative and experiential all these different dimensions of complexity which we can resonate with each other on and come together on those are going to be the

areas that you'll be able to experience 24 7. so again morning for you have a little coffee someone else is going to bed but you can connect and you can talk about complexity so we're just really looking forward to that developing just really briefly before claudius comes on and begins welcome claudius our presenters facilitators this morning will include rj corday

Paul Mestrand and Claudius Van Wyk, who will present and introduce himself first when he comes on.

I guess, sorry, I just thought he joined.

But just until Claudius jumps on, RJ is one of my colleagues and he is a deployment strategist at CogSec.

He's also a partner at Remoter Consulting Group and a non-resident fellow at the Atlantic Council.

He'll be talking about organizational sensemaking.

Paul Mestrand is a lawyer.

She is a professor of law and a director at Crichton University and a co-founder and a research director at Civity.

And then, perfectly timed, welcome Claudius.

Claudius is a co-governor at Evolutionary Transformations Group and a director at Transformation Strategies LTD.

So it's been great to have you here.

interact with our community and to present your wisdom and your experience here because the conversation that we had just a couple days ago was already so fascinating so please for the next 20 minutes claudius it is uh yours thank you very much daniel thank you for the invitation it's always exciting for me to meet with fellow complexity travelers who are on the journey of discovery


SPEAKER_00:
And so I want to basically take a few themes and give you a perspective, which is my perspective, the way I make sense of it.

And I guess the place that I want to start is by contextualizing complexity in our current world situation, particularly the COVID context.

So the VUCA acronym has been tossed about regularly.

I'm sure we all know that one.

But COVID has particularly given a graphic example of what VUCA means, the V volatility aspect, where we've seen the speed of propagation that has surprised people so severely, taken governments by surprise, taken politicians by surprise.

We won't mention names.

The uncertainty aspect of it, people not knowing how long it's going to continue, not knowing what economic impact it's going to have, what effect it will have on society.

The complexity aspect, so many dynamics are involved that makes it hard to identify who is vulnerable, who isn't.

Where is it likely to spread and where is it not?

So for example, in Africa, which is where I come from originally, it was thought that it would be devastating.

And it's turned out not to be the case.

So we just don't know why that is.

There are lots and lots of speculation about it.

And then the A piece, the ambiguity.

And just as an example of that, we've got the statisticians looking at that problem space and giving a very powerful argument.

And on the other hand, we've got the epidemiologists looking at that problem space and giving a different kind of argument.

And they both think that the other is stupid.

And so the ambiguity around the same information that we're facing.

So what this really shows is that we're struggling at an institutional level to deal with the phenomenon of complexity.

And what it also points out is that in our interpenetrated world, and I believe that as the world becomes even more interpenetrated through digitization, the problems of complexity are going to become greater.

And it's going to be calling on us to address it in a far more

engaged way a colleague of mine at the london school of economics in the complexity research group was already presenting on complexity theory to the european union two years ago she's already been researching the whole issue of complexity and pandemics

but it's really hard for institutions to engage with this.

And so it's up to us to see how we can facilitate that process that people can think and respond in a different kind of way.

So that's the first point that I want to make is that the current world context really

highlights the need to engage with complexity theory.

The second aspect of it is that we're in this shift from reductionism to holism.

And so it was particularly in my training of neuro-linguistic programming back in the 80s that my teachers said, remember that every action takes place in an ecology.

Whatever you're looking at only makes sense within a defined ecology.

And that began to make sense much later.

And it was one of the great physicists, Paul Davies, whom I've had the honor of meeting, who actually already in the 90s said, the shift in science is from reductionism to holism.

From the focus on trying to understand the parts to beginning to comprehend the dynamics of whole complex systems.

And there's a subtle difference between the Aristotelian view of the whole being greater than the sum of the parts, which is still a little bit reductionistic, and the dynamical process orientation that we're looking at now.

So we're looking at that shift from reductionism to holism, and then we're looking at the shift from dualism to monism.

So when we look at that, we can say it's almost the epistemology

Once we have identified and labeled something, we've now got some kind of a model of it that makes sense of it, our knowledge systems, and versus ontology.

What is actually happening in real terms?

And so that was a problem of the legacy that we received, the so-called Cartesian dichotomy of Rene Descartes.

where he sundered the world into the res extensa, the measurable, the quantifiable, the real world that was the substance of science, versus the res cogitans, which is the world of thoughts and feelings and beliefs.

And so our science began to focus in on the measurable and the quantifiable, the quanta, and began to lose the view of the qualia, the qualities of experience.

It was David Bohm who particularly in recent times began to say, but you know what, that's such a fundamentally flawed view.

What we have to look at is that all phenomena are emerging from one underlying field of unbroken wholeness.

He's the person that coined that notion of a field of unbroken wholeness.

And so how do we engage with that?

And so from a philosophical perspective then, the shift is from the subject object,

I am this observer that is looking objectively at the phenomenon to what is now called the phenomenological approach.

In my observation, I'm actually drawing out that which I experience, and all I can know is the experience, even if I'm using my best scientific method.

That then brings us to point four, which is the whole concept of holism.

And the topic that we're looking at is complexity theory bring a bridge between systems theory and holism.

We're going to come to that.

It was General Jan Smuts, who was a South African prime minister, who published the book in 1926, Holism and Evolution.

And that was really a fundamental shift in thinking where he said from some sort of underworld, we saw manifest matter emerging, which was at that inorganic level.

And there he really got intrigued by the principles of synthesis and synergies.

So, for example, we know that hydrogen and oxygen, two highly flammable gases together, create this totally new phenomenon of water.

What he was saying is that water is not hydrogen or oxygen or combination.

It's something completely new.

We know that salt is a combination of sodium and chlorine, sodium chloride.

But salt is not sodium chloride.

It's a completely new phenomenon and new hole.

And then when we move from those inorganic systems to organic systems, a new quality emerges.

And that is the quality of symbiosis.

Probably our most dynamic example of that that we can still observe today when we go out into the forest and we see the lichen on the trees or lichen on the rocks.

Lichen is a function of symbiosis.

We're looking at prokaryotes and eukaryotes and them acting together in what is called a mutualism approach.

They're supporting each other.

They're supporting a new symbiotic life form.

So the prokaryotes are able to draw the minerals from the rock.

The eukaryotes are able to synthesize the energy from the air.

And together, they now form probably the oldest existing living form on the planet today.

And from that, we then come to the principle of endosymbiosis, where those systems begin to function as subcomponents within greater orders.

So it was a wonderful, exciting discovery for me to discover that the mitochondria that play such a critical role in our cells, in our body cells, in the release of energy.

At one point in history, they were simply free-floating organisms in the oceans.

We've internalized them.

In fact, today I've seen an article in The Economist saying that we're a function of thousands of viruses.

We're actually a function of these information systems, of these living systems.

And so holism is really looking at that function.

integrative processes and it says that through history, entities like the human being have been absorbing that information and evolving with it.

Evolution is then a critical aspect of the holistic phenomenon.

Just to add a little subtitle to that, a subrider, when Charles Darwin spoke about the survival of the fittest through mutation,

What we are now looking at is not the survival of the fittest through mutation.

We're probably looking at a cofactor, which is the survival of the fittest relationships.

It's a fundamental shift from the classical view of evolution.

So holism and evolution is about the quality of relationships.

And of course, that's what Einstein was trying to tell us in his whole theory of relativity.

Significantly then for Jan Smarts, who was the author of Holism, he says that at all those levels, we need to look at fields of information, integrative fields of information.

And so we're not looking at independent autonomous parts.

We're looking at the parts as a manifestation of a field of information.

And quantum physics is really beginning to look at that in a more exciting and intriguing kind of way.

In terms of you and I then, what we're saying is that we have an ever-deepening quality of inwardness.

Inwardness was a term that was coined by Jan Smuts.

So what's that then got to do with complexity?

So what I'm wanting to suggest is that complexity provides a bridge between systems theory and between holistic science.

Having identified the word holistic science, I also want to put a caveat on this.

And that caveat is that holistic science doesn't as yet exist as a science.

We're exploring what that new science might look like.

We're into new unknown territory there.

But complexity then provides a wonderful bridge.

And I guess that the term that really defines

that redefines systems theory from complexity theory is complexity theory's focus on the principle of emergence, the principle of the novel, the principle of the unexpected.

And that focus then makes it difficult, it makes it impossible for us now to define direct cause and effect.

What we have to look at multiple convergent dynamics

that we can't all map all at once.

But what we can do in complexity theory is we can begin to really pay attention to the emergent processes.

We can really pay attention to what is happening.

And we can see if we can begin to determine trends

And so if we can determine trends and we have a vision of possibility, then according to someone like David Snowden, who was a great complexity thinker, he says, we can begin to see how we can amplify the trends that support where we want to go and dampen those trends that actually don't want to take us where we want to go.

And so in thinking about that, we thought, how do we as human beings then actually engage with that where the rubber hits the road in our daily life?

And in deep thinking about this, I saw five factors.

I call that the Pentagon.

And the first factor is a very ancient principle of presence coming right into a deep experience of the dynamical now.

When we have that experience of presence, it invites a non-judgment of what's going on.

As soon as we judge what's going on, we're actually superimposing past prejudice onto it.

Or we're superimposing future expectations onto it.

It just invites a non-judgmental being with what's going on.

That non-judgmental being within presence enables agility.

We can now engage in subtle responsiveness because we are with the what's going on non-judgmentally.

And so agility

is a product of presence.

When we have that quality of agility, then that enables a much deeper quality of engagement.

So as we relate with each other, as we converse with each other, in presence, in subtle response, the quality of being together deepens, the quality of commitment to the process deepens, engagement.

That quality of engagement has another product, and that is increased resilience.

When we have that joint commitment, we can actually take the things that don't work.

We have a greater collective field of support, and so resilience is enhanced.

And when we're doing that together, and we're open to so many more creative inputs, what that enhances is the whole notion of creativity.

And creativity was a key word in Smuts' view of holism.

Holism is life's creative process.

And so just to go back to David Snowden, David Snowden then defined systems theory from complexity theory in this way.

he said that systems theory looks at all the complicated components and relationships and interrelationships and co-dependencies and if something goes wrong you can map that you can track that you can find the components that are not working you can fix them and hopefully get the outcome you want so what that wants a complicated system is expertise analysis and experience

But he says as soon as you can come to complexity, you can't map all of the components.

But what you can do is you can probe.

You can test.

And if you're probing and testing with subtlety and detecting the responses, then you can actually go with those responses and dampen and amplify.

Go with the emergence and work with the emergence.

The word going with the flow now is redesigned from esoteric woo-woo to a strategy for human advancement, doesn't it?

And so he says that the probing is the way that we can then hold a vision of possibility and engage with a dynamical, immediate approach

moments forces factors that can actually take us to that it's almost like the creode idea that a glacier goes down the creode the glacier is following the creode but at the same time is reshaping the creode

We are co-productive in this evolutionary process.

And my sense is that right at this time in human evolution, we are at that place where we have to do a fundamental shift in the way we manage planetary affairs, human affairs, and so forth.

And so that's the great advantage of the complexity theory in bridging us to holism.

And the holism then, the Holos project,

Just to give an example, on Tuesday, we'll be having one of the global thinkers on consciousness.

And he's going to be looking at a new model of consciousness, which he calls reflexive monism.

From a scientific perspective, what is the best that science can tell us?

From a philosophical perspective, what can we know from what the arcane wisdom tells us?

And from a metaphysical perspective,

What does the unknown, how do we engage with the unknown?

It's a new space of human evolution that we're about to enter.

And that, to me, makes it very exciting to be in this era.

And I see that that just about uses up the time that you've allocated, Daniel.


SPEAKER_01:
wow very interesting stuff thank you so much claudius um just in the last uh you know one or two minutes before rj jumps on just thanks for bringing in so many of those ideas and then connecting it to our daily experience and not just in some sort of it might influence a

was being recorded on the stream but it was not unfortunately for you it was muted but basically just saying that you brought it back to the experience and to the importance of us not just thinking about how this could in a future world influence our style of living though it will but actually how it comes to play now so just yeah thanks so much for that and just in the one last minute um

What does it mean as individuals to partake in these dynamical systems?

Like what would be something we could tell a participant today?

How can somebody start to embody and interact in that style that you're describing?


SPEAKER_00:
So Daniel, to me, if I give you one sentence, it's when you're engaging in a conversation with whoever to really become curious about where they're coming from.

And in that curiosity about where they're coming from, whatever they're saying, there could be a jewel within that.

It is that curiosity of their process that enables the interaction where emergence takes place.

Become curious, become sensitive, become respectful with the one that you're with.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you for that.

You can close this window.

Well-timed.

Thank you, Claudius.

Again, just close it and we will continue.

RJ, welcome to the stream.

Great to have you.

Your video just blipped off.

Maybe you want to reload, but yep.

Well-timed and great to go from this.

Yeah, looks good.

I'm going to focus onto you, RJ.

Oh, it just blinked off again.

So maybe I'm not exactly.

Let me kick out Claudius.

Why don't you reload again?

Now there's just us, RJ.


SPEAKER_03:
Sure.

All right.

It's fine.


SPEAKER_01:
It's fine.

It's fine.

It's good.


SPEAKER_03:
All right.

Yes.


SPEAKER_01:
Go ahead and talk then.

All right.


SPEAKER_03:
Let me just share my screen.

Looks good.

Are you okay?


SPEAKER_02:
All right.

Okay.

So greetings.

All right.

Make sure this actually works.

Maybe it's not going to work.

That's good.

It's not working.

Wouldn't be a virtual talk without a technical issue.


SPEAKER_03:
Give me one second.

Nice.

There we go.

Yep.

Okay.

Go for it.

Oh, that's strange.

It's not working for me.

Reverse mode.


SPEAKER_01:
Also, you're near the end, though.

I think that's why.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, no, that's what it is.

I don't know why that's the case.

Just give me one second to figure this out.


SPEAKER_01:
rj is traveling from the future he will be giving his presentation in reverse it will uh help you on the concepts as you proceed on one timeline but there we go okay got it okay and if you yeah no it um it started from the end for some reason sounds good it was that generalist twist but you could read your video if you wanted otherwise um no worries


SPEAKER_03:
okay clear now clear okay all right well getting started then all right uh a little about myself


SPEAKER_02:
So my name is RJ Corday.

I'm a deployment strategist at an organization called CogSec, where I help seed and deploy research teams on topics like knowledge management systems, education technology, gray zone warfare, which is all forms of war that don't require written declarations, and then cognitive security, which is to do with how we protect ourselves and our organizations against things like social engineering attempts over services like social media.

Uh, then I'm a consultant at promoter consultant group where I help prepare education materials for military intelligence and civilian teams, specifically remote teams, uh, hence remoter.

And then finally, I am a non-resident research fellow at the Atlantic council on appointment to the geotech center, where I help, uh, uh, contribute to research on topics like organizational sensemaking, medic narrative, mimetic and narrative warfare, cybernetics, and intelligence analysis.

So overall I do research.

I mostly do research on the dynamics of organizations.

and that comes in the form of looking at systems engineering approaches to modifying the state and performance of teams medics and narrative and then organizational sense making in context with complex adaptive systems which is what i'm here to talk about today so when i look at complex adaptive systems when they show up in my radar they usually come with a few keywords

just unpredictability, interconnection, confounding variables.

These are systems that are hard to make sense of, even in some of the more advanced approaches I've seen, like some of the ones that came out of the world modelers program at DARPA.

When you get out of toy problems and into the real world,

very you end up with this paradox of there being an infinite amount of information to pull yet at the same time we never really have the data we want uh so uh that's what this talk is going to be about a little bit so what i'm going to try to do is i'm going to try to define sense making one and then what i'm going to do is i'm going to try to extract some practical best practices from high reliability organizations that have to make sense of complex systems regularly so uh

From my background and the audience I'm usually talking to, I'll usually define sensemaking as intelligence production, OTW, operations other than war settings.

The development of actionable intelligence for effective action.

So this is like in legal domains, finance, science, policy and politics, etc.

Now, for this audience, I think it's helpful to say, what is intelligence production?

So if you look at doctrine publications, which are like military textbooks or more theoretical approaches to intelligence analysis, it's usually defined as the actions or processes used to produce knowledge.

to reduce uncertainty, right?

So intelligence production is usually defined as a process, and the intelligence, the product it produces, is actionable.

So info plus analysis yields insight, and insight yields reduction of uncertainty and surprise, and reduction of surprise increases the likelihood of success.

So when we say it's a process, what exactly do we mean?

Usually, you'll see it defined as the intelligence production cycle, which is five main elements, planning, collection, processing, production, and publishing.

So first, planning.

is the setting of objectives, requirements, and specifications.

What is it we're actually trying to do?

What does the end product need to look like?

What type of actions are we trying to facilitate?

Then collection, which is the actual gathering of data and queries.

Sometimes it's composed of actual putting your hand in the pond, so to speak, to see what comes up.

This is areas like human intelligence, where you're trying to extract information from human targets.

Then processing, which is the verification and scrubbing, the collation for relevance.

So collection gets us this giant heap.

You think of like NSA, like the dragnet, right?

You end up with an enormous amount of information and then processing is about like going through the heap and seeing what's actually going to be relevant.

Then production, which is the analysis, the conversion of raw information into actionable intelligence.

And then finally publishing, which is editing, formatting, dissemination and feedback.

Sometimes you'll see the split into additional two steps.

I usually see it as five.

And there's a separation of concerns between each of these objects.

So personally, I'm most interested in the collection processing production pipeline because each of these steps includes their own little production cycles.

A recent paper I did with Daniel, which is reimagining maps, I did with Daniel and then a contributor from a company called Mapbox.

This was written for National Geospatial Intelligence Agency through their incubator, Reimagining Maps.

And we talk a little bit about how we do this, specifically in the geospatial context, how we integrate across numerous specialties to make sense of complex adaptive systems.

Then I'm also really interested in gamifying this process.

Uh, but I won't go down that rabbit hole cause I don't think we have time.

Uh, so intelligence production is a process.

Okay.

What does it mean when we say it needs to be actionable?

Again, looking at theoretical approaches, and then doctrine approaches, and then looking at more hands-on accounts, like from Harrington, stalking the Viet Cong, which is about human intelligence operations in South Vietnam.

The intelligence we produce, the knowledge we produce, is always action-oriented.

It's about protecting organizational interests, advancing organizational interests, informing operations, demonstrating need for action, or increasing the efficacy or likelihood of success.

I've seen some people split it out as like estimative intelligence and then actionable intelligence.

But at the end of the day, the estimative intelligence is usually meant to inform some action, still actionable.

So now looking at sensemaking in the civilian domain.

I like the definitions by Veik, where he brings up, it's a theory and process of how people and organizations reduce uncertainty or ambiguity and the social negotiation of meaning during decision making.

Looking at military texts as well, there's a few definitions that come up, but all of them have to do with reducing uncertainty to facilitate actions.

That is the basis for intelligence production.

So in this article I wrote for the Atlantic Council, Making Sense of Sensemaking, what it is and what it means for pandemic research, I bring up another definition by Veik, which is while the word sensemaking may have an informal poetic flavor that should not mask the fact that it is literally just what it says it is.

Sense-making is literally the act of making sense of an environment achieved by organizing sense data until the environment becomes sensible or is understood well enough to enable reasonable decisions.

And this definition can apply to all kinds of systems.

So it's just more generalizable.

And I think, so usually what we'll end up doing at this point is flip the definitions because again, for a certain audience, it's just easier to explain sense-making as intelligence production because that's what they're familiar with.

But I like to define intelligence production as the procedure and protocol for sensemaking in military domains.

Again, it's just more generalizable.

There's a field developing, which is called active inference, which is specifically about this generalizability of how thinking objects change their priors and adapt their beliefs to minimize surprise in the environment.

I won't go down that rabbit hole either right now, but so if we're looking for, for best practices for sensemaking and complex adaptive systems, um, but if I'm looking for best practices for anything at all, I'll usually look to hire like a category of organizations called HROs, which are high reliability organizations.

So in military domain, uh, it's usually like special forces, super carrier crews, uh, counterterrorism support in the gray zone between civilian and military is air traffic control.

And in the civilian domain.

You see it as like fire departments, operating rooms, oil and mining operations, electrical infrastructure management, offshore drilling.

And it's important to take a second to think about what all of these organizations have in common.

They are characterized by their interactions with complex threats.

They deal with non-routine phenomena as a matter of course.

And finally, even though all of this is the case, they maintain really low failure rates.

I like to look to this account in the paper Collective Mind and Organizations by Veik and Roberts to kind of give a more grounded understanding of what it means to be a high reliability organization.

So imagine that it's a busy day and you shrink San Francisco Airport down to only one runway and one ramp and one gate.

make the planes take off and land at the same time at half the present time interval, rock the runway side to side, require that everyone who leaves in the morning returns the same day, make sure the equipment is so close to the edge of the envelope that it's fragile, then turn off the radar to avoid detection, impose strict control and communications, fuel the aircraft in place with their engines running, put an enemy in the air, scatter live bombs and rockets around, now wet the whole thing down with seawater and oil, man it with 20-year-olds, half of whom have never seen an airplane close up, and by the way, try not to kill anyone.

Even though carriers represent a million accidents waiting to happen, almost none of them do.

This is why I like to look to HRS for best practices because they are organizations that are dealing with environments where if they can't develop best practice for making sense of their environment and facilitating good sense-making, then they'll be cold.

They literally cannot exist.

I like to think of

I like to think of intelligence agencies as high reliability organizations for sensemaking and complex adaptive systems.

When they have errors, they generally end up turning into absolute catastrophes.

But for all the visible errors we have, they have thousands of successes we don't get to see.

They are generally, I really do like to think of them as high reliability organizations that really their only task is sense making in complex adaptive systems.

And these best practices they've developed come from a common root.

So after the fall, this wouldn't be an RJ talk if I didn't either talk about wolves or Ragusa.

So this time you flip the coin, you get Ragusa.

After the fall of the Western Roman Empire,

Um, there was a small city that was left on its own and enemy territory, and it became, it came to be known as the Republic of Ragusa.

Uh, Ragusa wasn't very strong.

It's a very small city.

Uh, and, uh, what they ended up doing was developing an information network as a basis for getting the upper hand over its enemies.

Uh, they were surrounded by large peer adversaries for the entirety of their existence.

Uh, and they integrated the first global intelligence and counter intelligence network.

Uh, and I isn't yours model out of necessity.

Um, it.

survived as an independent nation in a hyper-competitive environment, consistently dominating its information environment of the Mediterranean, all the way until the late 1800s.

It's now known as Dubrovnik, Croatia, and you may recognize it because it was used for filming the center of the global intelligence network led by Varus in Game of Thrones.

So I like to think of geopolitical environments as complex systems.

And Ragusa was a country or a city-state that developed the best practices for sense-making in these complex Byzantine relationships between the many nations and city-states, most of which wanted to conquer them.

So these best practices still survive today and were held in common between all of these modern historical figures and intelligence production management and usage.

So more recently, you have Newton.

I think I'm pronouncing that name correctly.

He did some more recent work on systems engineering of intelligence production.

uh it's through a gandalf project uh for the army center of human centric command and control decision making you have admiral bill studeman uh twice acting director of cia twice deputy director director of nsa naval intelligence quite a resume uh then sherman kent who's the father of intelligence analysis wild bill donovan who's the director of the oss which is precursor to cia and then iron felix who is the director of the chica and the ogpu which are the precursors to kgb foreign intelligence agencies of russia

So all of these people in common, despite all different timeframe, all came down to the same best practices for making sense of the complex relationships of the worlds they occupied.

So we're going to go through rapid fire each of those best practices and pass it back to Dan.

So first is postmortems.

So it's looking at what came out the other side of the pipeline.

Why did we get the results that we did?

Which is okay, well, easy to say, but the problem with CIS is obviously there's going to be a lot of confounding variables.

So you don't always get to see the factors.

So it's a matter of looking after you get your results of saying, well, what factors could have been more visible?

Where can we collect data next time?

It's always about moving towards some status of resilience by seeing, okay, well, if we don't have the information that we needed to be able to understand what happened,

what will get us there next time.

Then finally, really important is we're in the system where threshold events observable.

That's looking for the start of cascades.

Because again, you can do infinite data collection.

It's important to mark down these key moments, key events, and then try to collect data around them.

Then premortems, which are lesser known but really important.

Wargaming, running through potential hypothetical outcomes before you run simulations, before you look to outcomes.

So that's variations on past outcomes, novel and imagined outcomes, role playing, considering the factors that might be involved in these hypothetical outcomes.

And this is really important because it helps inform you as to what to pay attention to and what to collect data on when you run the system next.

Then shared collection.

Really, really important.

Using shared platforms and formats for sharing incoming data.

If you're working with large groups or large community, really important to try to find good places to store all that data and then make it comparable because compression is everything.

So the higher the volume, the more important this becomes.

And on that topic of compression is developing ontology on purpose.

I know complexity is about the meta, about the concepts that hold in common between systems in a lot of ways.

But for each system you're looking at, it will come with its own quirks and its own behaviors.

And it can be very helpful to compress understanding by developing ontology within your organization or team.

A developing shorthand, very useful.

Then collaboration.

And this is helpful.

explicitly in common between all five of those figures I mentioned, which is leaning on the expertise of others.

When the OSS first started getting going, their analysts used to work 17 hours a day and usually work seven days a week.

And if they couldn't handle that schedule, they were let go.

And the reality was they didn't have the means to share intelligence.

And after World War II was over, one of the key initiatives was figuring out how do we make it easier for all of these different analysts to be able to lean on the expertise of other analysts, right?

Sense making about any CAS is interdisciplinary.

So one of the better ways to handle this leaning on others' expertise is to establish or join communities of practice, like this one.

It allows you to improve your skill set by seeing your gaps, and then learning from others within and without your domain.

So even today, just coming onto the Gather, I learned a few pieces that, honestly, Google Search wasn't going to help with.

I need to actually ask an expert that knew more than I did about a particular topic to get an idea.

Because it allows you to do the follow-up questions.

So learning isn't just consumption, right?

You have to interact with your environment in order to get more information out of it.

And really important to this being able to lean on others' expertise is to let others know what your capabilities are.

So otherwise they don't know to ask, right?

So then finally, I think this is the most important one is focusing on action.

Everything should be facilitated toward action, right?

Set clear goals.

So in my last talk, CW, I mostly talked about operations orders and catechisms as a way to do this.

which is basically saying like, look, what is the situation?

Get a formal document that says, what is the situation?

What is the mission?

What are you actually trying to get done?

Because again, any CAS, you could collect infinite amounts of information.

So you really do need a buoy to swim to.

What is needed?

Why is it needed?

Who needs it?

Be consumer focused.

If you're trying to do sensemaking, the idea is that you're going to come out with some viable intelligence product, something that's actionable.

And it can't be actionable unless you have some idea of what the consumer looks like and what they actually need.

And then asking, what do we already know?

So you don't do redundant work.

Those are the five I identified and five I could get through to build up to in 15 minutes.


SPEAKER_03:
But yeah, that's it.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, RJ.

Very interesting and important stuff.

So chill.

All right.

Thanks, Dan.

See you later.

Yep.

And Shirley, welcome back.

Great.

Everyone, I'm going to post the Jamboard link in the YouTube chat.

There's a little voice in the background, Shirley.


SPEAKER_05:
Oh, okay.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, but okay.

That sounds good.

Thank you.

So we posted the Jamboard link in the YouTube chat, and I'm going to change sharing my screen into sharing the Jamboard, and then we will jump right into the Jamboard.

So thanks so much to Claudius and to RJ for sharing those two elements.

And just to sort of give this total...

multiple perspectives on complexity, a real honest shake, let's say.

We've heard from a few different perspectives.

Maybe it's not your first time hearing about these areas.

Maybe it is your first time, but we're all here together in this community.

So what this Jamboard is about is about going from a lot of the ideas and a lot of the ways of thinking about it into the specifics about how we're going to move forward with each other in complexity.

And so as people start logging on, thanks, I already see a bunch of people on there.

So what we will do is on both computers at once, I will advance to the first question, which is the second slide of the Jamboard.

And in the second slide of the Jamboard, the question is, who are you and what brings you to complexity?

This is sort of a ice melter or ice breaker.

Maybe just while we're seeing what people have to write, Shirley, what would you say to that question?

Who are you and what brings you to complexity?


SPEAKER_05:
Yes, I apologize.

There is some noise from the fan in my laptop, so I'll try to speak loud and in mute if I'm not speaking.

Actually, about five years ago, I read a book, Danella Meadows' Thinking in Systems, and that really, I think, changed my life.

It definitely did.

I am not even sure how I got to complexity from that event, so to speak, of reading that book, but

But I did get here to where I am sitting right today.

So that's systems thinking.

And a particular book brought me here.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.


SPEAKER_05:
What about you, Daniel?


SPEAKER_01:
You know, I've also, I think, forgotten where the ball of yarn begins, but I know that attending the Santa Fe Institute Summer School in 2015, where it was a month long, it was this teams and about interdisciplinary perspectives, just being exposed to not just the ideas, but the people as well, is what I think got me started on that specific branch.

and yeah i i agree it's sort of a funny little experience we all go on and here we're um seeing some things already coming out it says who are you what brings you to complexity drop a post-it note here with contact info there's people twitter links there is um curiosity

Trying to figure out how to put a dent in the universe.

Different things that we're here for.

I think that's kind of the fun.

Everyone's going to be working on different projects.

In different relationships.

You know, doing their own thing.

So just, you can come through.

Whether you're watching this later.

Just come back and you can...

add more you can look at what people wrote but let's move on to the next slide which is the third slide in the jamboard which is what is something you are curious or wondering about and the um starting question is what is the simplest complex system known so maybe surely i'll type one for you while you answer but what is something you're curious about um i


SPEAKER_05:
think about actually just recently machines, you know, mechanical things, well, including computers and, you know, to what extent can you characterize some machines as being complex versus complicated, you know, your car, you assemble it as, and it does something.

But I know that with computers, there's a lot of, for example, computers have a lot of stuff going on that could be chaotic even.

So,

That's one question I have.


SPEAKER_01:
So maybe for someone who hadn't heard of complicated versus complex, what do you think is like important about that distinction?

Are they the same thing?

Are they opposites?

Are they compliments?

Where are those two come into play?


SPEAKER_05:
Oh, no.

Well, yes, that's exactly why I have this question, because

You know, there's the idea of emergence, and so, you know, you put together your machine and say it's a car, and you know at the end of it it's going to be a car, right?

It's going to drive.

It is not going to take off and fly in the air.

That's pretty  well, that's complicated.

But with complexity, you see these, you know, agents or entities coming together, and there is 

an inability basically to predict what will happen.

So you can look at those emergent patterns and the, you know, you can look at different levels, but you know, so anyway, that's, I mean, there are many complicated issues that are technical, I think.

But when you get in with humans, you'll get behavioral issues.

It becomes complex pretty fast.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

And these questions just about which systems have which properties and how can we interact with systems and how can we find similarities and actionable ones, especially across systems.

This is what always motivates us.

These are the kinds of things we were talking about when we were planning.

I think we could go on to the fourth one.

The fourth slide.

is asking what is a cool complexity concept and how would you like to teach it i'll let you either can go with the one first or if you want to pass it to me first i'm happy to answer well actually in thinking about this uh before this event i was thinking about pre-mortems and at an nrj um


SPEAKER_05:
brought that up in his talk.

But obviously a premortem is not a complexity complex, excuse me, concept, but it is for me a tool or process where it can help surface a lot of intuitive thoughts you may have about whatever problem you're dealing with or issue.

Surface it as complex because premortems,

You know, basically, what could go wrong?

I'm about to do X, you know, start a new job or, you know, whatever, enact a policy.

What could go wrong?

You know, and it just seems like when you get a diverse team together to think that through, a lot of great stuff comes up.

And it can kind of combat that unsystematic thinking.


SPEAKER_01:
So I agree.

The premortem helps us do many things.

It helps us think about the adjacent possible and the things that are two steps away.

Like what if this happens, then what is something else that might happen downstream?

Claudia's talked about that as well.

Here, somebody has written, I would not teach.

I would offer opportunities to explore on our own mutual and responsive terms or teams maybe.

But I also agree with that.

It's a great perspective.

Thank you, Taika Metsa.

Because it is true that it's a zigzag and an improvisation in a dance.

And teaching isn't necessarily just the upload and the download and giving someone else your version of a concept.

It's about...

having them be engaged in a learning journey where they're finding out how these topics come into play in their own life.

So I think that's also true.

And then just also what you had said about the importance of having diverse teams is when we know that it's teams that are going to be having the final performance, the paper being written or the project or the impact, then it really refocuses us on team performance.

And when we think about team performance, it can be a beginner asking a question

who actually raises the insight or who raises the counterfactual or clarifies some question or even stimulate somebody else to clarify.

And that can make truly all the difference.

And so that's just always the situation I think of is the beginner's mind in a complex problem.

What do you think about that?


SPEAKER_05:
Yes, actually, that's absolutely true.

Um,

I see a sticky note about Stigma G, which I know you know a lot about.

So I'm going to ask you to talk a little bit about that.


SPEAKER_01:
Let's see.

The sticky note says, Stigma G rules across all levels in a multi-scale fashion.

The holism weaver is Stigma G. Let me see if I would decode that.

So Stigma G is...

algorithms, situations, scenarios where agents are in feedback with their environment and then the way that they modify their environment changes their likelihood of doing future events.

So one physical example is like an insect picking up a pebble and that changes the likelihood that it does some other pebble related event in the future.

But the social example is like if you put a link in a chat room, now you've modified the environment in a way that maybe has somebody else go down a pheromone trail they wouldn't have necessarily expected.

And what the post-it note might be hinting towards is that this holism, so when Claudius talked about the movement from an Aristotelian perspective of emergence, which is the sum is greater than the parts, right?

it still focuses on the granularity of the parts and he suggested that there could be a dynamical or a process-based holism that would be based upon the relationships and the connectedness and so in that way it'd be relations and dynamics all the way down rather than just particles and particles and particles all the way down though those also exist as stable configurations of relationships

So Stigma G being maybe a unifying principle that would help us connect different levels of analysis.

Let's go to number five.

Number five says, what kinds of participant behaviors and norms can help us make Complexity Weekend an amazing space?

so we can just chill here a little bit while people are getting to this slide and adding any thoughts again we want to include people who are watching this in replay or who might be a few minutes delayed so no worries if you're not seeing this live this is going to be a link that you have access to to continue to stigmatically provide our community with feedback

So maybe together, let's let's just from the discussions that we've been having over the last couple of weeks, like what would be something that you would recommend people to do and what would be something to avoid?


SPEAKER_05:
The things we want to see, I guess openness.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

I would say things we want to see, I would just say authentic participation because it is something that's going to mean something different to every person.

And whether you have a pre-existing commitment or you're in a different time zone, you're going to go to sleep, didn't wake up early, or you have something that takes you away from it for a moment, it's all good.

Just roll with it as you truly are and participate however you want to.

And that will be more than enough.

And there's no need to qualify or disqualify oneself in terms of their perceived role in the community.

Just it's all good.

We want to be there where you are.

And so that's what I would really encourage.

And yeah, not to be.

not to be, um, you know, morose, but what would be something, you know, just to avoid maybe some, not, not something malicious, but like, what would be something that could happen that we would just recommend not to do?

I'm just curious.


SPEAKER_05:
Well, I see actually a few, um, yep.


SPEAKER_01:
So let's see.


SPEAKER_05:
I see, um, go ahead.

Leadership being, um, something we want to see.

And so again, that's, that's something that they can be practiced by people, um, in their own way.


SPEAKER_01:
And on the other side, we see linguistic rabbit holes as things to avoid.

And there's probably a couple meanings of this.

One of them is just like, oh, X means Y. Okay, but what does Y mean?

You can keep on defining, defining words.

We know there's a dictionary and we know that doesn't even begin to capture it.

So let's not go too definitional.

And also maybe I'll put on there too is jargon.

So like inaccessible jargon.

um because everyone is coming from a very different learning perspective and sometimes words that are just super super obvious like url maybe everyone knows what that is if they're on the internet but do people really know so a lot of times let's just double check our language and when we're explaining something that we're really immersed and excited about

Let's remember to use terms that other people will relate to or in a really respectful way, ask them if they know of a certain term.

I think that's helpful.

Do you have anything to add on that?


SPEAKER_05:
I absolutely agree with that.

And I think that it actually can promote, obviously, better communication.

And your own understanding of what you're talking about, if you're able to communicate your ideas without using inaccessible jargon.

So that's something that I would like to personally, I feel is very important for myself as well.

It's about, you know, not having, not being exclusive because that language and terms can be barriers to people for their understanding and belonging as well.


SPEAKER_01:
Totally agree.

Thanks for sharing that.

And that always reminds me of Sasha's one syllable, explain your research in one syllable.

And also last one on this side is repeating the same ideas over and over again.

Yep, we're all kind of in this, we're returning to the same ideas, but it's a strange attractor.

We always wanna do a different perspective.

So yes, if it's the same idea and same phrasing and we literally just heard it, yep, we can definitely move forward.

But also let's return to some of the classics with a new take, new perspective, new team, new context.

That's what makes the classics new again.

So number six.

Community support.

So here it's pretty open-ended.

We basically just asked, what can people feel like giving?

What can people be looking for?

Are you looking for someone to do database work?

Are you somebody who knows how to do a certain type of design work or a certain type of skill and you want to provide that?

However it may be, this is just kind of an open-ended slide where we...


SPEAKER_05:
are just broadly seeing what people would benefit from and what they might be able to provide so do you want to provide one on either side or i can um well um when i when i think about looking for you know i i really i guess people who will raise their hand and signal that they're interested in

conversation.

I think that's kind of a general thing, but, you know, for me, you know, an openness to talking, and so I've enjoyed talking with some participants at the October Hackathon who are working in very different areas.

I have a background with housing and homelessness and policy, and I really was very excited to talk to people who are

getting their PhD in neuroscience or network science or also to you as well.

And so many people, just totally different areas.

And we're just trying to like communicate with each other.

So that was really great.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, just one note on that, I think, before we start reading these post-it notes is that bringing together across perspectives, it's really the most special thing.

So thanks again for helping us with this heartbeat and other participants, whether you're here at this event or you're watching this later.

we really welcome and encourage people who step into organizing.

So on the looking for side, we have someone's looking for expertise in project management, of course, classic.

Looking for funding or financial support, a new contract.

Nice.

This is real life is we need the means to support ourselves and our teams.

We need the resources.

roles.

We need team members who can, whether it is, you know, be related to project management or some other question.

And let me read this one.

It says our subject area being so vast, it would be great if we could bifurcate into standing groups of areas of interest.

Thanks for the suggestion.

Anonymous post-it note.

It's something we've talked a lot about as well.

And just to sort of give a thought on that while people are adding a few more notes.

during the weekend hackathons we really highlight new teams forming new unexpected emergent teams forming however during the heartbeat events we also will be encouraging that there's fluidity of teams for certain projects so if people are interested in continuing a discussion a working group can arise and if they contact us we're happy to help it in any way also maybe somebody brings a project from outside the community that can be like a collaboration

But specifically to the question about standing groups of areas of interest, we have also thought about having slightly more long-term structured complexity weekend projects that are focused

Things that anyone can show up at event and immediately jump into.

Things like building resources and reading lists.

Things like helping with onboarding and technology and accessibility.

Things like online events.

There's so many different areas as well as areas that are more on the applied side that could be really helpful.

and somebody's looking for pointers to the basic of neuroscience that can be used in computer science, I know that many people will be able to help you.

We also have Dentropy offering coding lessons in Python, JavaScript, or SQL.

That's really awesome.

a lot of expertise on all sides.

And as we have qualitative, quantitative design, lived complexity, all these dimensions, let's learn from everyone.

And that's just really what's exciting.

I think when people who are offering for help and I even see the same person on on multiple sides because everyone could give so much, everyone can

help uh their own journey in so many different ways and that's just what's awesome is different stages of the day week life things happen and so sometimes it's uh to uh

things happen that require you to need assistance and hopefully the community's there.

There's other times where something that might seem like a small thing for you can be really big for somebody else.

So that's really cool.

Yep.


SPEAKER_05:
Daniel, I see another Blue Knight saying that she can give guidance in agent-based modeling in Python.


SPEAKER_01:
And neuroscience.

Boom.


SPEAKER_05:
Very fun.

And in neuroscience.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

And I think what's also just one last note on this slide is like, it's a community where if someone says they're going to offer programming, just believe it, that that comes with a broad understanding of impact and about relational thinking.

And somebody who is even on the more relational thinking side or systems or interpersonal, they may also have surprising depth in other areas.

So again, just like Claudia's brought up, like we've heard so many times, let's start with just being curious and really giving our full attention.

It's not always easy in the digital context, we know, but let's give our full attention to other participants and make it amazing.

Cool, so lots of gray on both sides.

Thanks everyone for posting in there.

Let's go to number seven.

So in number seven, we'll just briefly talk about online collaboration.

And here, just a few things that Monica Kang, one of our previous facilitators and innovators box, one of our awesome associates, a lot of tips that she has for online collaboration and teams and relationships.

The five that we have on this slide are use active listening,

be curious and open, assume kindness, play by our strengths and over communicate.

And let's just go to the last few just so we can click through them.

Let's go to eight, which is how can complexity have impact in real world systems?

and we'll do two minutes on this slide and then we'll do two minutes on the last slide so two minutes on this slide how can complexity have impact in real world systems so one thing i'm going to add just right off the bat is prevent disaster because there's so many times where um somebody may have stepped in and said hey but what if um this you know electrical thing leaks onto this water pipe and that could have saved lives so we really have so many ways in which complexity science in the planning stages can prevent or ameliorate disaster

What would be something else to add on to this slide?


SPEAKER_05:
Well, yeah, something that obviously is out there now and around the world is COVID-19.

And so, for example, using network science, this is something I saw recently, using network science to think through immunization targets or vaccination, excuse me, targets.

you know, how would we do that?

Or how would the policymakers look at targeting different populations and using network science for that?


SPEAKER_01:
Cool, very interesting, and I agree, important stuff to consider.

Look at this, a bunch of people, epic, epic, epic, all of these post-it notes.

So many different ideas just firing in, understanding how things could be done differently, complexity is the real key to understanding real-world systems, run scenarios.

This is just awesome stuff because it's about the combination of the ideas, dealing with unexpected events on all different scales.

How could it get more real than that?

What could be more real than what is happening in the situations that we need to be working in, serving in?

You mentioned your work in policy.

What could be more complex than that?

Multiscale, through time.

It's just great things to consider.

And let's just go to our last question slide.

our last question slide is are you looking for team members and again in these last two minutes of our live stream we won't get the full list of everyone who's on either side of the team member marketplace so to speak but just in this space um what is useful about this slide shirley or like how can we use this best for ourselves and our teams well um later on in the uh


SPEAKER_05:
Poster sessions, we'll be presenting on one, excuse me, for one team, the Crowdmeter app.

And so we actually have some specific requests for skill sets that we have on our poster, but that is moving, you know, into the piloting of the app and some coding skills in JavaScript and Android.

So that's specific.


SPEAKER_01:
Nice.

Good to call that out.

And again, it's kind of similar to what can be provided or is needed from different community members.

But here there's a little bit of a focus on the team and on the project.

And so if somebody says, I want to join, I want to join a team on knowledge management.

Maybe it's something that we can already connect you to.

Maybe it's something that we'll start.

And so to speak to John's comment in the YouTube chat to balance bifurcation, balancing it with cross-disciplinarity and how are we going to have these standing groups?

What do people want to work on?

If you're here and you're listening to this and you're in the Jamboard and you have thoughts on what to work on, let's hear them.

And with that,

I will just say that we can conclude this live stream.

Surely it's been epic.

Again, really appreciate the help of the organization.

And I know that we'll be able to hang out for many more events.

So everybody on the live stream,

Thanks a lot.

The Jamboard is live.

The spreadsheet is there for you with a program.

And the Gather is where we're going to be continuing all of the discussion.

And in five minutes at 11.30 a.m.

PST is when we're going to have Palma Strand's interactive relational event.

So everyone, thanks for listening live or in replay.

And if you're live, we will see you in five minutes on the beach at the bottom left of the map outdoors.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you.

See you soon.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks a lot and see you later.

Bye.