SPEAKER_00:
Hello, everyone.

Welcome.

Thanks for joining the May 2022 Complexity Weekend Heartbeat.

It's May 28th, 2022, at least where I am.

And we're going to have an organizer,

update in this opening live stream so please enjoy the next 25 minutes of michael garfield's music then the organizer opening and then we'll go to a jam board and hang out and work on this interactive jam board before the rest of the sessions happen in our interactive gather space so thanks again for joining enjoy the 25 minutes of music and see you soon


SPEAKER_01:
Help me!


UNKNOWN:
so so

so

so so


SPEAKER_01:
so


UNKNOWN:
Thank you.

so

Thank you.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
oh


UNKNOWN:
music music

Alright.


SPEAKER_00:
Hello, welcome everyone.

Welcome, Michaela.

Thanks for joining.

So, hope everyone is doing well.

It's the May 2022 Complexity Weekend Heartbeat.

And I see Michaela as a spinning wheel, but I know you'll join soon.

We'll start with a organizer's introduction and then head over to an interactive Jamboard.

In this video, we'll go over a welcome to Complexity Weekend.

So whether you're returning or whether it's your first time, welcome and good to see you or see you back.

Cover some basics about Complexity Weekend, then discuss some specifics about the May 2022 heartbeat that we're going to be participating in in the next day or two, like the program and schedule and some details on the gather space.

And then we'll head over to an interactive Jamboard.

Hey, Michaela, how goes it?


SPEAKER_02:
Very well, thanks.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Then we'll head over to a Jamboard and just start with a blank slide, bring some images in and talk about Complexity up till near the end of this hour.

And then we'll head for the rest of the events over to the Gather Space that Michaela and I are in right now.

And we'll go from there.

So first on Complexity Weekend.

So history and initial conditions are important for complex systems and Complexity Weekend had the first event in May 2019 in person in San Francisco.

And since then we've had four, we have a little bit of a older version of this slide.

We had a, we've had now,

two online weekends in 2020, two in 21, and we had our fifth weekend in 2022.

And it feels like forever ago, but that was only about a month ago with the April 22 weekend.

And the weekends are every six months.

They're cohort based and with a focus on team formation that's been evolving each time.

And then in between the weekends are the smaller heartbeat events that we're participating in right now.

One other way to look at the process of Complexity Weekend is in terms of this community energy graph.

and on the y-axis with the green line is like the community energy and this is how much synchronous and for the weekends asynchronous activity there is and around those weekends are peaks of energy and then the heartbeats are when we come together and those who have previously participated in a weekend or those who are just wanting to taste complexity weekend and see what we're up to these smaller peaks of energy are the heartbeats

So we're right here in the first heartbeat after the April 22 weekend.

And we have several more heartbeats as we're going to be leading up into the September 23 to 25, 22 weekend, and then a few more heartbeats at the end of 22.

And that will take us to 23 and the green lines, the community background energy.

And then there's the multi-scale system that is you, your relationships, your teams and projects, and also the broader ecosystem that complexity weekend is a part of.

So.

What's coming to mind for you, Michaela, or what's something you'd like to add in there?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I think it's quite interesting to see how these peaks over the weekend weekends, I mean, the biannual weekends, is keeping momentum through constant meetings every month.

And I think that's very important to keep.


SPEAKER_00:
totally agree it provides like a smaller but also more frequent event and then that

of links back almost to biological rhythms like there's the breathing and then within the breathing there's the heart but then within the heart there's some faster rhythms too and so these nested rhythms help keep the entire system really adaptive and flexible it helps us build our experience in different roles like being a participant being a facilitator being an organizer and testing things out and having a little bit of a faster speed and also without

Being an overwhelming frequency like every week or something like that gives a lot of on ramps for people who want to be participating.

And we're just beginning to organize for September 2022 weekend.

So if you're interested in organizing or in facilitating for that, we can share some more information.

So get in touch.

Complexity Weekend has a role-based approach to organizing as a community.

The biggest circle is the participant circle, and everyone is a

grounded as a participant.

Then in an event specific capacity, there are organizers and facilitators.

Facilitators are catalyzing live and interactive sessions.

Organizers are coordinating and sending emails and making sure that things happen that need to happen.

The associates and supporters are those that are providing financial or non-financial support to the community.

And then the two kinds of events that participants engage in and that bring individuals in are the monthly heartbeats, like we're in right now, and also the biannual weekend cohorts, which we aim to have like a cohort shared experience.

And there's synchronous and asynchronous aspects that only that cohort is going to experience with each other.

And then also there's like hopefully an increasingly shared experience around having completed a cohort at all.

And it's kind of like being alumni of different years of graduation, but different.

We also have committees, which we'll talk more about soon and teams that are forming inside of CW and outside as well.

Anything to add here?

On the committees, we'll have a slide to show more in detail, but anything on this slide?


SPEAKER_02:
To me, it's very important that you can step up to be an organizer or a facilitator.

It's no rocket science.

Everybody can come with their own style and their own inputs, and it's a very open community environment.

in the regards that any initiative is welcome usually.

And so if you don't feel sure about your capacity of being a facilitator, just try it out.

You'll see everybody's very nice.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

So here are some of the upcoming events.

And this is one of the primary ways to participate is by showing up for events.

Here is our page, which I'll post in the live chat on YouTube.

And that page has the updated events.

Right now we're in the May 22 heartbeat, and here's the June, July, and August heartbeats coming up, then the September weekend.

And the weekend, the times and dates are shown for the heartbeats, but for the weekend, no times, because it's actually something that's continuously occurring with a global cohort.

And then again, just those few,

heartbeats at the end of the year that we'll have and the dates and the time are in utc once you register for that event you'll be added to a calendar event so you can see it in your own time and this is a key way to participate this is the synchronous times when other people in the community are there this is what we're doing when we're complexity weekending together

Then another way to get involved and to be regularly involved in learning and applying complexity on teams is through the committees.

So the CW committees are teams that are applying complexity and they're applying it to different areas that have a focus or a system of interest being Complexity Weekend itself.

So facilitating a live session or organizing for an event are not the only ways to contribute to making CW the place that we want to see it be because all of these committees in different ways and in different levels of activity currently are contributing kind of by providing services for the CW organism.

So we have DAO, distributed autonomous organization, which is exploring some affordances related to digital governance and digital decision making.

Website and CRM, which might be updated in its name to something like .tech because it encompasses the way that we want the website to be a single portal for the total participant experience.

We've just recently updated the website so it has a login and an account and that's just kind of being tested and explored.

But ideally we'll be at a place where somebody will go to complexityweekend.com and from there they can log in and have access to all the events, the video and the synchronous and the asynchronous will all be within one link.

So there won't need to be information linking you to different places.

It'll all be in one spot.

Wiki, which is kind of an archival committee placemaking related to updating the gather space and also more broadly just thinking about making CW a place that people can feel included and open in.

Teams, which was very active leading up to this past April weekend, focusing on the Teams experience.

Legal, thinking about the legal aspects of Complexity Weekend and also the legal aspects of complexity or complexity aspects of legal.

Art, different genre and media of art, visual art, video art, the sound art, like the Michael Garfield music that we played at the beginning of this live stream and the images that participants have made that we use for the website.

Finances.

keeping CW balanced in the fiat world and sustainable.

Outreach, which I'll maybe let Michaela describe more in a second.

Onboarding, focusing on the onboarding process of individuals as they join a heartbeat or a weekend for the first time and facilitators and organizers, which are composed of those who have been those roles previously and they kind of provide stewardship for people in those roles.

a given event who are looking for guidance or as we think about how to make distributed decisions we will start to explore how these previous roles can help shape those decisions so anything you'd like to add or also mention about the outreach


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, so outreach is a committee that is aiming at including more and more different communities into Complexity Weekend with Connects, Systems of Thought or Endeavors.

So we're looking for new communities to reach out to and to include as facilitators, participants or organizers.

So yeah, please reach out.

Maybe...

You can just share an address on the live stream to tell people where they can reach out to us to see if their community, another community they're part of would be maybe interested in joining.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Let's return to this on the Jamboard, but complexity includes many ways of practicing and thinking and doing and applying, and they don't always use that word.

So just searching for like complexity and architecture, complexity and...

psychology complexity and sustainability but there's people who from complexity looking out we see them as just a total adjacency someone who could be an incredible community participant and somebody who would be receiving and adding a lot by participating in cw through different roles and so how can we reach out and make sure that people who could be constituting our global and diverse community are actually doing so

which takes us to some of our values.

And for the values,

We will post a link in the live chat right now for a CODA page with a collaboratively formed values that we worked over the weeks as a committee in DAO.

And it covers what brings us all together, which is complexity, but we can go a little bit deeper into that, as well as our collective purpose, core values, and participation guidelines.

So I'll post the values in the chat and the participation guidelines.

So we'll just kind of look at this CODA page.

I'll crop it on the live stream, but looking at the mission and the purpose, Michaela, what's one that just like stands out to you today and how do you see it coming into play?


SPEAKER_02:
One that's very important to me is the respect all participants show to each other and also the inclusiveness of everybody.

And I think that's, you know, we have a yes and mindset and not a yes but.

And we welcome everyone and everyone can contribute to however they understand complexity.

And it's worked very well so far and I'm sure it will keep on going.

I'm always surprised to see that we have no trolls, which is great.

Self-regulating system.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, there's other things I could probably say, but it's not the time.

But this is the mission.

We learn complexity science by doing.

We serve through deep time, and we include to innovate.

And then some notes to unpack that, that were written...

really as a group and then all compiled together.

Our purpose to form a deep time community and to grow a network that's learning and applying complexity.

Here we have our values also with the value written and then some notes.

So I'll just read the value part and then Michaela, like any thought you have on one of them, Complexity Weekend is itself a complex system.

education is active we learn complexity science by doing teamwork makes the dream work participation means accessibility and inclusion for all respect is key no side doors get out of the building stakeholder input is key we draw inspiration from the values of other communities and reach out on the edges and stay involved what's one that kind of is interesting to you today


SPEAKER_02:
i think also the education one uh it's always amazing after a heartbeat or a weekend everything that you like summarize that you've learned uh which you don't realize in the moment but like for weeks later you're like thinking about things you've heard from other participants in other fields and kind of find bridges between your thoughts their thoughts


SPEAKER_00:
uh new perspectives and I think uh education by doing is is a very very key factor here yes and doing could be doing art it could be doing social life having a conversation it it can look like so many things like doing what well

What?


SPEAKER_02:
Anything.

I think we'll be drawing tomorrow.

We're going to be drawing together.

So that's really cool.


SPEAKER_00:
I look forward to that.

We'll have some question sessions today with Sasha and some art and more tomorrow.

And then we have a table of some organizational alignments that people have raised as like areas where CW can grow and develop and improve.

And then we want to keep a organizational memory of how those happened.

And then also just to quickly check over the participation guidelines.

So participation guidelines also works in progress and collectively updated.

I'll just read them and then feel free to give a thought on any of them.

Complexity Weekend is a complex system across multiple scales, participant, relationship, team, cohort, community, ecosystem, et cetera.

Adopt a complexity thinking mindset.

Communication is key for relationships and teams.

Show respect.

Embrace technology but know its limits.

And full participation, whatever that means for you.


SPEAKER_02:
I like the technology one.

We've had issues in the past and I guess since we're always updating whatever we try to, you know, everything's a work in progress in this community.

So we're always on the edge and sometimes it doesn't really work, but that's okay.

There's always someone to step in and to help you out and other ways of communicating if it doesn't work.

uh the way it was intended um so many times i had people share my presentation or record something for me and um yeah there's lots of people out there to help you so that's really cool


SPEAKER_00:
that made me think sometimes we're on the edge, sometimes we fall off, and then there's the bungee cord and there's a rock climber who's going to catch us.

And so check out these pages to learn more.

And of course, being involved is the way to update what's written here.

And that's kind of the top-down aspect of us having feedback as a complex system where the bottom-up is people's actual behavior and engagement.

And then the organizers are just...

doing the minimal action possible just to represent and keep that flow of energy continuing.

So let's go to talk a little bit about the heartbeat in particular, and then we're going to go to the Jamboard and just continue the complexity conversation, get things like warmed up.

So here you'll find the program for the heartbeat.

I'll post this link again in the chat.

And right now we're in the live stream.

After this live stream, at the top of the next hour, we're going to have the one-on-one sessions.

So those are in Gather and that's where we have these unstructured conversations.

We remix and we get to meet some new people and have a really awesome, just direct connection and also catch up with some people we might not have seen for a month or for longer.

In the third hour of the first interval, we'll have a facilitated session by Sasha, aka Squasha, on complexity and questions.

And that was arising out of the facilitation of Octopus, Professor Penland from April 22 weekend, and there's a questions team.

So I'm sure Sasha will share more and bring us all into that conversation and

It's a fun topic.

And then in the fourth hour, we'll have spotlight talks, which is just an opportunity for anyone who's there to give a five minute or less anything.

It could be a singing, it could be a project you're looking for participants on, or you're looking for feedback, or you just wanna give kind of an extended reflection with everyone paying direct attention on something that you experienced or a new idea.

It can really be anything.

then whoever's there in those spotlight talks we let everyone go for it if they want and then that trails off into just us connecting as individuals in the end of the first interval in the second interval i'll update the schedule there is going to be some events but it will begin with one-on-ones and it will end with a spotlight talk and there will be updated information here on the website with what will be in those two hours but not in this screenshot

The organizers for this heartbeat were myself and Jana.

So Jana, thanks a ton for your awesome organizing.

And we've been exploring this new way of organizing or a little tweak on our organizing.

thinking about how to especially deal with voluntary and exciting, but also sometimes complex recurring tasks.

So anyone who's interested in that can contact us or the Complexity Weekend at Gmail address.

But Jana, thanks for being a great organizer.

After this live stream, the rest of the activities are going to be in Gather.

Gather is this always open space.

We hope one day in this atrium, in that space, we'll have 24 hours a day.

There will be a community participant who's there to hang out and co-work or give you feedback or just to relate in that complex way.

And a few tips.

You can change the settings.

You can also see the chat and I'll show the bottom bar on the live stream right now, which is the Gather interface.

So down there with the grapes, that's where you can go to settings and change settings.

So if anyone's having any issues about Gather, then just let us know and we'll be there to help.

Also, if you've clicked on any of those links shared in the chat, you'll have been visiting a Coda website, and especially for organizing and for the cohort-based weekends, we use Coda to a larger extent, but it doesn't really come into play that much today.

There's various ways to support Complexity Weekend.

The most important are to show up and to bring your attention and participation and to provide any word of mouth recommendations.

Directing people to complexityweekend.com is like a very easy beacon because whether they're free this month or in three months or in 10 months, we're gonna be there and that website is gonna be the place where they can find out about how to register for participation in the upcoming events.

Also, we have those committees that we mentioned and everyone is welcome to join the committee and or co-organize or facilitate, even if you're not sure what that means or you just want to take kind of a observation role in the beginning.

We also have mechanisms that you can support us financially.

So check out this PayPal link or let us know if you have any other ways that you'd like to support.

We're going to go to the Jamboard.

So,

I will repost the Jamboard link in the chat, and then we're going to just chill, do the Jamboard, talk about complexity, hang out.

So while I'm sharing this, what's been going on, Michaela, or what?

What would you like to just sort of start off with as our initial conditions on slide two on a blank Jamboard slide?


SPEAKER_02:
I would love to get some keywords and images about what complexity means to different people.

How about that?

Awesome.

Awesome.

okay can you just post post it in the chat for gather as well so i can join from there yep thank you thank you okay and so um on the top bar of


SPEAKER_00:
the Jamboard, you can flip between different slides and on the sidebar is where you can click on different tools.

So just to go over the tools and then we'll return to your question about keywords.

The top button is a drawing implement.

There's an eraser.

The mouse is a selector for dragging things around.

The sticky note will allow you to type a sticky note.

and you can double click on them to edit them.

Adding image allows you to add an image from locally.

You can also copy and paste an image in.

There's the ability to make different shapes.

Very, very important.

Text box, just to create a transparent text box.

And then there's the laser.

And we've had some laser fights before with these disappearing pheromone trails.

So, Michaela, you asked about keywords for what is complexity.


SPEAKER_02:
Keywords are images or sounds.

I'd love to hear complex sounds too.


SPEAKER_00:
How do we see sounds?

I'll just post a link.

A what?


SPEAKER_02:
Post a link with a sound.

I don't know if it works.


SPEAKER_00:
What images represent how complexity sounds?

What sounds represent how complexity looks?

Is the sound that represents how complexity looks different than how complexity looks?


SPEAKER_02:
Does it have to look or can it just feel?

We're coming with the questions again.

How does complexity feel?


SPEAKER_00:
Let me post an image.

What's a complex mood?

When in the last day or when in the last week?

In the moment or looking back, were you thinking, I am in a complex mood?

Was that a good mood?


SPEAKER_02:
I think it's every day.

Every day is a complex mood, but usually a positive one.

So that's kind of nice.


SPEAKER_00:
Smells, of course.

You know, smell, I think... Complex is often used to refer to smells, like in wine or chocolate or a dish with a lot of spices.

And also sounds...

There are complex visuals when we see something that makes us think about complexity, whether it's minimalist or whether it's like a Jackson Pollock or a scientific figure, but there's something about sounds and the smells with their all at onceness.

And so like there's something about the way that it changes through time that we need to resolve it.

Like you can't just pause one second of a band

And if like when the music freezes on the computer and it just like, so then what is it through time with a complexity of sound or with a smell?

Like you can't pause a smell.


SPEAKER_02:
I really like your take on smell because today I went to a wine tasting and I was really wondering, I had just brushed my teeth before I tasted the first wine and I was very happy that it became better than the first two seconds, you know, as it developed.

So somehow you've got something of the

instantaneous complexity but then you still have sequences where you can like recognize different notes like in a perfume and i was like okay so this tastes very strange with a toothpaste in the beginning and then you're like oh but it's also floral and and now i get the wine taste and the alcohol the heat of the alcohol as well so you know you kind of recognize the complexity

in conjunction with different senses.


SPEAKER_00:
And also it bridges out of the experience.

Like I'm thinking about this live stream, either you were just brushing your teeth and this is the first cup of wine.

So you were in some context that wasn't

complexity science or complexity of learning and applying a complexity community.

And so previously you brushed your teeth.

This is the first glass of wine that we're participating in.

And then like the second one, when we go to the one-on-ones, we're already going to be having at least considered a few of these questions and topics.

And then another way is almost like, this is the brushing the teeth.

Happy to brush my teeth with you.

Then the one-on-one is like, oh, now I'm getting into the mode of not just listening to information or to...

being typing on my computer or something but but that the first conversation is when like participation washes over us rather than just something that can be more like it like a toothpaste so let's let's look at a few that we have written down so thanks to the people in the chat who are posting things we have awkwardness complex feelings

sequential while instantaneous, sense-making, cellular intelligence.

This looks like an image of some water on a web, smells and breathing.

Yeah, complexity can often seem like it's something else.

But what does it mean to engage with these sensory experiences and rhythms?

with complexity in mind.

Yeah, versus complication.

What do you what do you think about that?

Or what does that make you think about?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, it makes me think that in

Common terms, when you talk about complexity and complication, people kind of put it on equal level or kind of use it interchangeably.

But because it's complex doesn't mean it's complicated.

Does that make sense to you?

The complication is not inherent to complexity.

Some very clear systems are complex systems, and solutions or emergence from these systems doesn't have to be complicated.

So I think we should make sure that people understand that a complexity weekend is not a place where we just make things complicated.

That's what I was thinking about.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so...

I'm going to try to do some modifying and see if we can look at it a different way.

Here we have a slime mold, perhaps, on the bottom right.

And then here's language and symbols.

The terminology, it could also be symbolic terminology.

This doesn't just have to be English words.

So there's this big ocean of common terms, just associated with general use of language.

The things that are being learned in introductory language lessons, like something I'm going through, so also thinking about.

Then there's the shared terms.

Here's this lobe.

branching off from the ocean of just broader human life is complexity weekend or complexity as a field.

And these arteries are like the shared terms.

Like in complexity, there's a few terms that whether you've heard them two times or two million times, like feedback loops, phase transitions,

A few other things that people are writing here, relationships and interactions, sense making, like those are the terms that signal in a way that we're reading a book about complexity or a book that's adjacent to complexity, talking to somebody who has some familiarity with that area.

And then out on the edge with Michaela with a bungee cord ready to catch us are like unshared terms.

Michaela has skills and practices and angles that are going to be not shared with anyone else and every single other possible combination.

And so it's like building on our true commonalities through what makes us bring our focus to complexity out to the edges and

where we're making connections on the edges with unshared terms.

So somebody might bring up like an algorithm or something that they're working on in day-to-day life.

And then that's like the connection on the edge between the people, but it's also the connection on the edge between the terms.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, it's very important to build bridges between disciplines and cultures.

So I think complexity allows that.

It is, though, important that we do not scare people away with jargon.

So make everybody comfortable with their shared terms.


SPEAKER_00:
So let's read some more.

Complex moods.

So I think this is perhaps referencing when we discuss, like, what is a complex mood?

Curious?

puzzled, intentional, yearning and desiring homeostasis.

So desiring that return to a comfort zone.

Here is perhaps related to those discussions about different senses and the relationship with time.

Music is movement in time and movement in pitch harmonics, triggering memories and internal mental and physical states.

Very cool.

And then here's like maybe a little example of connections and hinging on what one person has added and then building a bridge that connects it somewhere else.

So like someone had written cellular intelligence

Is that intelligence parcelated out into little cells like an Excel sheet?

Or is it the intelligence of the biological cell?

And then someone added cellular optimization.

So what are cells optimizing or how might a cellular approach, whether it's like a biological cell or like a cellular automata,

The kind of model that's sometimes used in complexity modeling.

How is that related?

The experience of flow.

Peacefulness in movement and immediate sensory and cognitive appreciation.

Where do you see flow and appreciation in complex moods?


SPEAKER_02:
I think we get flow whenever we communicate with someone.

So that's already a good thing happening.

And as they say, as long as people are talking, they're not fighting.

So that's kind of good.

As long as we can, you know...

try to express our understandings and our divergences, we're still working on building bridges.

And it's way more complicated to build bridges than walls.

And it's more difficult to build bridges than to tear them down.

But I think we have to strive to build bridges between people and disciplines and cultures and, you know, points of view.

And I think Complexity Weekend and its events kind of get people together who would never have met otherwise.

And so we're creating bridges in very unexpected ways, I guess.

And that's really cool.


SPEAKER_00:
I want to take that and actually try to visually represent it.

So on slide two, we talked about what is complexity.

So I snapshotted that and now let's explore what's adjacent to complexity.

Where does complexity bridge?

How does complexity bridge?

So I'm gonna pick up on this squiggle and squiggle it off to a new area.

In research and in science, that's sometimes how the conversation in the literature feels.

Like somebody has expressed a train of thought

And then they say, well, here's the introduction context, here's what we did and what we found.

And then really somebody might wanna look into that in a different ant species.

And then that's sort of like this opening.

And then you can pick up on that squiggle and continue that discussion by linking it.

And here it's being linked to systems thinking.

How do you see systems related to complexity?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, I think it's very adjacent in the sense that you have to look at the whole instead of the sum of its parts.

Then again, the models in system thinking and the models in complexity are a little bit different.

So there's different perspectives, I guess.

And so, yeah, another bridge to build.

I think it's a short bridge.

There's bridges that are longer to build.

So this one's kind of an easy one.

And also people who are used to thinking in systems or thinking complexity will be able to understand the other discipline or whatever framework.

So I was wondering what you were saying...

You were saying, you know, you get the squiggles.

And I do the squiggles with metaphors in my practice as a communicator.

So I like the idea of, you know, jumping stages, jumping species, jumping perspectives.

So I think that's a very interesting way of handling new things.

New to us.


SPEAKER_00:
I mean, even the idea of a squiggle, whether it's kind of a body squiggle or a drawn squiggle, that's like that synesthesia.

Of course, the connection between the papers is not actually written.

But so staying in this upper left systems quadrant, while people can feel free to add more terms around, this is a image.

so we'll have I think on the upper left quadrant is a systems quadrant we have a a mood vibe gestalt quadrant maybe on the bottom left and maybe a language and communication and then there's still more areas for totally different areas but here um is a finger pointing at the moon which is

Something I've seen brought up in many different ways and cultures to separate what's being pointed at from the pointer.

So words, are they the moon or are they the pointing?

And sometimes it can feel like

Whether it's splitting hairs, making distinctions that aren't key differences, or obfuscating intentionally or not.

Like we have systems thinking, systems dynamics, also total practice and area and field.

Then there's like dynamical systems, complex systems, complex adaptive systems.

those are like it's like a crowd of people pointing at the moon we're talking about the heart and the lungs that's the moon that's like the entity that we're focused on and even just within english

before other human languages are brought in, before other senses are brought in, before math in formalism and programming is brought in.

It's like, we already have so many ways to fragment with language.

And so how do we actually bring the focus, like take the crowd and instead of people saying, well, the pointers are different, we're talking about different things.

How do we find what we're actually speaking to and then find coherence there?

And then that actually brings appreciation to all the perspectives because everyone's going to have a different perspective on the moon and be pointing a different way to it.

because they can't be in an overlapping place and they're going to have had a different experience.

So there's probably many, many more we can add up here that are very complex systems adjacent in that they're explicitly looking for patterns across systems and generalized systems modeling approaches.

Anything else on the top left quadrant or let's move to like language and math and formalism.


SPEAKER_02:
I think we can move on.

There's so much up there.

I mean, we could like spend eight hours on that.


SPEAKER_00:
Common language.

So we're thinking about how complexity bridges.

How do we be in the second slide space, be in that complexity space?

mentally be in the space or socially or professionally be in the space and then how do we bridge and so one of these bridges is going to be common language so we'll come from awkwardness

perhaps to common language like learning a language i feel awkward saying it sometimes so that's with complexity being so vast maybe there's other places we can draw maybe it's like a you know network and so on but up here what people have written we have common language common intentions

Then the green one says common language equals one is mathematical models that apply in different systems and different scales and metaphors.

So what is something that comes out to you there about complexity bridging through common language?


SPEAKER_02:
It's a tough one.

I mean, I would look at it and reverse the lens.

Stop pointing at the moon.

I'll point at my finger right now.

So the moon's looking at my finger, maybe.

I think common languages allows complexity to be explained.

it's not complexity that generates common language.

I think it's more the other way around.

We can find communalities in different communities as well or different cultures and kind of relate it to complexity and use complexity as a filter to figure out that we're talking about something that resembles or feels similar to what we're talking about.

Then again, I'm a big fan of metaphors.

I think they work well, especially biological ones, because, well, you know, I'm feeding you what you like.

common intentions biology is a very good uh bridge i think across sciences because it's still something that can concretely been seen by by most people and can be kind of explained with visual aids which which helps people to to get it so uh i think that's something we should

think about and also to go with the theme of this heartbeat with the questioning.

I think asking questions is the key to understanding complexity.

I keep asking questions and then, you know, answers lead me to more questions and it's very interesting and it kind of

of a sudden something bridges in your brains like oh that's the same way as this or similar to this and how about we try to apply this to that and so creativity comes out of juxtaposition of different perspectives i think and we create a common language through that so here's


SPEAKER_00:
Perhaps not, or perhaps a counterpoint, but this is a very interesting post someone wrote.

But, or yes and but, diversity leads to greater intelligence.

So how do we not let our common language to narrow understanding?

For example, there was a famous book someone wrote where the space of adjectives was reduced to good, bad, plus good, double plus good.

That was as good as it got.

And that was a shared language for sure.

So shared language.

But then if we're all in the trunk of the tree, there's no leafs.

And if we want a cactus, maybe that's fine.

But then even the cactus has to branch.

So if we're going to have shared language, what is it going to be?

And then how are we going to have edges to connect among?

Really important point here.


SPEAKER_02:
I think it relates to context.

The context.

the language used or the metaphors used or whatever the examples shown have to be depend on the context.

And that's also with complexity, you have to adapt to your counterparts and try to break it down as simply as possible without losing the threads of what makes it a complex system.

So, you know, sometimes it's,

It's like a fine line in order to make it understandable without losing the substance.

But it's usually depending on context.


SPEAKER_00:
What is the need?

So here's a few more that people have added.

So these are like different languages and modalities of commonality.

Math was brought up.

Graphs.

All kinds of visualizations in art.

programming, and computers.

And then looking at those, here's a quote someone added.

This allows the designer to pay attention to the specificity of each particle component individually, yet produce a complex overall structure.

Gazella, Bowerman, and Dyna, Taimina, 2012 paper.

Someone could provide a link there if they wanted.

So, this.

This is like the pointer.

It's like a linguistic pointer because it's never contains.

It's saying this is a pointer quite literally like this thing I'm talking about is what allows the designer to pay attention.

So let's, you know, hinging on that ambiguity.

Graphs allow the designer to pay attention, dot, dot, dot, dot, dot.

Minimizing jargon, but also recognizing that common language shouldn't narrow understanding allows the designer to pay attention, dot, dot, dot, dot, dot.

It's like, that's such an awesome quote.

Thank you for whoever shared it and the link to here, because it's like, we get to mix and match and recombine

bridges with complexity, like a telephone operator connecting people and the tools, the ideas, the language, not just the different words we can use, but all these different ways of even communicating.

And then it's like we're in the blender or maybe we're in the weaving space where those can be connected in a new way.

Are we getting at how complexity bridges?

Parts of it.


SPEAKER_02:
We're working hard towards it.

And we're asking all the right questions.


SPEAKER_00:
Working hard, hardly working, skiing, going fast, but it's downhill.


SPEAKER_02:
I just wanted to point out that this allows the designer to pay attention to the specificity of each blah blah blah thing.

I think we should not forget this should also allow the person that's on the receiving end to understand.

So, you know, whatever I say might be clear to me, but is it clear to the person I want to communicate it with?

So I think that's also a very important part of communication.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, the design side.

Designing what we'd like to say and then there's putting it out into the unknown and into the known unknown or into the unknown unknown when there's the reception.

And is the goal to just, you know, make a zip file of what you meant and send it over and have you just unpack it.

But then what about when you're going to unpack it into some novel way that maybe even a communicator did or didn't, um, initially see, um, and then what?

Yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
Or intent.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Or intent.

Um,

And then also maybe just as we kind of in this last minute or two before we take a little break and then go to gather, this quote potentially was from the context of crocheting, like needlework.

And so here it makes me think about how like in needlework, but also in like drawing,

there becomes something like a coherent final drawing or like a sweater or whatever it is, but the attention is paid very locally.

And so it's like with relationships building, the needle stroke is the act of listening and what we say carefully.

And that's actually all we have to pay attention to like in the moment.

And then we knit that relationship with the material of complexity, with the people of complexity.

And that maybe helps reduce sometimes how complicated and overwhelming the field can be.

Because yes, it's a big sweater we're working on, but also there's something quite limited and local that we can focus on.

Just this conversation with this one person

just this one question that was asked and just introspecting and coming up with thoughts to that one question, knowing that complexity has all the questions and we have some of the answers, but the spotlight can only go to so many things at once.

So maybe in closing, what would you say if you would like?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, I'm just always very happy to join this community.

And I'm looking forward to drawing together tomorrow and seeing what's going to be on offer and connect again with people I haven't seen in a while.

So thanks for inviting me.

Thanks, Daniel.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

So we will close the live stream, take a few minute break, and then head over to the atrium.

So it's in the calendar event.

If you've been added or if you've ever visited the atrium before, it's the same link.

We'll be there in the main room and then head up to the room above for the one-on-one sessions.

So thanks, Michaela.

Thanks, Jana, for organizing and see you soon.


SPEAKER_02:
Bye.


UNKNOWN:
Bye.