SPEAKER_01:
think we're live hello and welcome to synergetic stream number 9.0 it is july 4th 2021 and today we'll be talking about synergetics so let me just load up the youtube live chat feel free if you're watching live to write a comment there

okay today we'll be talking about synergetics you can write in the youtube live chat if you want today in synergetic stream number 9.0 the spirit for today is honor freedom and information we're going to go over the key memes and themes and things to integrate as usual and then go through some text readings

today rather than synergetics actually directly we're going to be going into grunge of giants and world game and then also a playboy interview and it's going to be also about a little bit of history and random thoughts on america because it's the 4th of july so what is synergetics synergetics is relational and multi-scale thinking

It's connected to accessible experiences and to the... Wait, let me just check why my network was dropping.

It's connected to accessible experiences, tangible things that we can hold, but also... I'll turn down the stream.

Sorry about that.

as well as things that we can think through ourselves so there's no appeal to authority it's um more like systems thinking and that entails itself to engineering and a few other areas that we go into in synergetics there isn't an infinitesimal or an infinite so there's nothing that's infinitely big nor is there anything that's infinitely small and points and lines and planes are

basically just thought of differently in terms of synergetics because space filling, volume enclosing is when things start to actually exist.

In synergetics, design and design science is framed as anticipatory and cybernetic.

And there's this relationship between tensegrity and synergetics, kind of like engineering and physics.

So synergetics is the geometry of thinking.

then tensegrity is more about building physical structures that embody some of those principles and we find out from both branches from theoretical or applied that space has a certain shape so whether in physics discovering that there's certain geometry of space or the synergetic way of thinking about it space has a shape and so designing within that is the imperative

universe is the total scenario and that means all that there is so you don't need to put a the before universe but actually we'll return to that later and then system is any defined subsystem which entails a shape that's volume and closing so every system entails the boundary states the blanket states and then also what's enclosed and then what's excluded

then this idea of 4d comes up a lot like four dimensional there's 4d time lock which is this shape on the right side then there's the emphasis on the tetrahedron and on that being the basis of all measurement and volume the one down here one volume rather than the cube or the square which is here with the three volume so in other words you can sort of repack

tet volumes into the cube but you get all these irrational things arising if this is your default descriptor which is why in synergetics the tetrahedron with the edge of one and the volume scale to one is what the unit is and there's other senses of 4d like from kirby's slide here with the polytopes and the geometry so higher dimensional geometry

then space and time three plus one or four and then tetrahedron is minimal shape nothing's really changed on the things to integrate side except that the playboy interview was previously on here and now that's going to be in this discussion

And then just one before the grunge, one shout out slash cool thing to look into if people are interested is the work of Casey House and the developing SimU.

This was a couple weeks ago now that the Trim Tab Book Club

casey joined and we were able to see a presentation some of the cool stuff that is happening here so check out this casey-house.com for cool visualizations like these ones cool stuff all right on to the grunge of giants so this is not synergetics but

going the requisite few steps of explanation away from any source text from Grunch of Giants, it just, there were so many ways to bring it back to synergetics in the distance, but proximally, I thought, and given the nature of the July 4th day, it might make sense to take it in a little bit of a different direction.

So what is Grunch?

Grunch is an acronym, and Bucky explains it this way.

There is no dictionary word for an army of invisible giants 1,000 miles tall with their arms interlinked, girding the planet Earth.

Since there exists just such an invisible, abstract, legal contrivance army of giants, we have invented the word grunge as the group designation, a grunge of giants.

g-r-u-n-c-h which stands for annual gross universe cash heist pays annual dividends of over 1 trillion US dollars so that's what grunge is grunge is kind of this uh system of control or regulation or structure and we're going to explore more about it and it's in this book Grunch of Giants

does bucky define grunge or what does grunge do this is the second part grunge is engaged in the only by instruments reached and operated entirely invisible chemical metallurgical electronic and cybernetic realms of reality

So only by instruments reached and operated.

The way to think about this visually is like the 400 to 700 nanometers that you can see, and then all of the other electromagnetic bands like wifi, radio, et cetera.

So these realms, which are not part of our

unaugmented sensory apparatus but can be exploited because it's part of this universal just like there's you know it'd be like owning a color to own a wavelength so maybe in that sense there's like all this possibility and value but these other bands that are outside of an individual person's perception it's difficult for an individual person to get a control of so

almost as a tautological consequence of that these channels become controlled by things that are larger than individual people and it's pretty interesting how bucky connects that idea of what you can perceive with or without instrumentation to a few different domains including cybernetics so this is from the 80s when he's writing it

then what's one interesting way not the only way he goes into that grunge exerts control by making pre-graduation employment contracts with almost all promising university science students it monopolizes all the special theoretical know-how to exploit its vast inventory of already acquired invisible know-how technology

So that kind of knowledge technology is the extremely valuable information that allows exploitation of these bands of operating that are being dominated by the grunge.

And one way they do it is pre-graduation employment contracts.

So it was just interesting for me to wonder about what those were.

Was that the promise of employment?

Does that reflect student debt?

Does it inflect something else?

So pretty interesting points about what Grunge is and does.

Here's another interesting quote from the Section 3, Heads or Tails We Win, Inc.

Corporations are neither physical nor metaphysical phenomena.

They are socio-economic ploys, legally enacted game-playing, agreed upon only between overwhelmingly powerful socio-economic individuals and by them imposed upon human society and all its unwitting members.

How can little humans successfully cope with this greatest of all histories invisible grunge of non-human giants?

First of all, we humans must comprehend the giants games and game playing equipment rules and scoring systems.

But before we can comprehend their game playing, we must study the history and the development of giants themselves.

So with Bucky, it's always about the general and the specific.

And it's almost like there's this game theory, which is invoked multiple times.

The games of the giants, they need to understand how they play and how the rules are and the scoring systems.

He's saying we need to understand the specifics of what exactly got us to this point, but also the general of the game theory and the structure of interactions, the shape of interactions, that in general leads to certain kinds of outcomes.

So we have general and specifics, with him wanting to know about both the history of the corporations and countries that are in place today,

but also, again, those general trends.

So it's kind of synergetic thinking with macro and micro applied to, I guess, geopolitics.

Okay, so instead of just copying more paragraphs of Grunge out, let's look at a little bit of the history.

So this is from his, I guess, his CV on the BFI Institute.

And it was interesting to note that both Bucky and Grunch have a phase change in the late 1960s to early 1970s, which is, funnily enough, kind of the Grateful Dead sweet spot, at least for me.

And here's a quote from Grunch, which I've put in the middle.

This actual but invisible threshold crossing began in 1969 when human scientific knowledge and technological ingenuity, backed exclusively by adequate citizens' tax-raised government financing, learned how to do so much with so little as to be able to place humans on the moon and return them safely to Earth.

so he's pointing at the moon experience in 1969 and leading up to it slightly following it as sort of this pinnacle of achievement of a mobilized military research industrial complex this wartime level of defense and research starting to become integrated and created

and that's something we'll see more about in a few slides but in this graph we have time on the x-axis from the 20s to the 80s and the y-axis is the

total per year in the solid line and then the cumulative in the dashed line of the published reference to Buckminster Fuller from 1917.

And it's just interesting that right there, he gets a little blip in the late 1960s, and then he, right in 1969 and 70, starts taking off in terms of his mentions.

So he's having this parallel relationship

experience at least invisibility but it's something of course he's been working on for decades before this all happened because he started in the 20s but there's this phase transition and perhaps one for society too that happened during that time so here's what he writes

in drutch i have been a deliberate half sensory fused insider of a cool-headed natural gestation rate paced revolution armed with physically demonstrable living relevers with which altogether to elevate all humanity to realization of an inherently sustainable satisfactory to all ever higher standard of living

and it being 2021 and whatnot i was like what happened 50 years ago and of course there's a website for that and it's wtf happened in 1971.com and this is the first graph on the page but there's a lot of graphs and it's kind of just a meme because of course nothing happens with just one year even phase transitions are kind of messy in their own right so of course it's just a meme but there's some pretty striking graphs

that reflect how certain things that were correlated or anti-correlated before 1971, between that year, plus or minus three years, there's some major changes to certain economic, social features.

So here we are, 50 years after whatever happened in 1971.

And maybe this is the 50th year celebration or something like that.

later in grunge he writes critical threshold crossing of the inevitable revolution is already underway the question is can it be successfully accomplished before the only instinctively operating fear and ignorance preclude success by one individual authorized or unauthorized pushing the first button of chain reacting all buttons pushing atomic race irradiated suicide

so the phase transition has already been passed in his mind and this is leading to this single point of failure one individual that's whether they're authorized or unauthorized according to whom in a time of pluralism right that first person who pushes the first button

that's going to lead to certain catastrophic events and it's just as true now as it always was because the complex threat surfaces are vast and the relationships are really complex as well so it's really hard to know what that button is maybe it's a like button you know maybe it's some power plant so who knows what is what with the buttons and the complex networks so

to kind of pull back to a level where we might be able to model it theoretically or just visually it's a lot like waddington's epigenetic landscape metaphor which i have up here on my wall as well it's almost like bucky's saying that you know around 1971 there was this bifurcation point maybe it was 50 years before then and then here we are kind of at another phase transition point so

we're already going down whatever historical branch happened over the last 50 years you know much of which i wasn't alive for but we're at another branching point every year we're at a branching point this one just shows a few but we can think about it in these 50-year lag cycles and we're at a branching point with our actions every single day and just like you could line up cell fates on these um valleys or different morphologies of ant

bucky framed it as this decision between using our productivity and ability to provide are we going to use that for weaponry and killing rate or are we going to make living rate we already had all these metal warping factories we had the ability to make high throughput houses we could have supported people domestically and abroad but was that capacity

relinquished or was the hold on the weapons production strengthened?

Did we move towards livingry?

So this is kind of an epigenetic way that Bucky's framing it, epigenetic landscape, bifurcation point, complex threat surfaces way, saying that we can't go back to some previous branch.

We might not even want to.

So what are we going to do in the branching going forward?

Not hypotheticals about branching in the past because we're not going back there.

So let's go into a few of the specifics that Bucky lays out.

He writes this.

What was once world-around high credit for American ingenuity and friendliness is no longer existent.

On February 1st, 1982, the United States ambassador to the United Nations stated to the media that all the, quote, United Nations now hate the USA, end quote, from Bucky.

What they hate is Grunch.

But Grunch is able to deceive the world into blaming the very innocent people of the United States.

So...

i don't know about the veracity of that story about the ambassador or whether that's felt one way in one part of the world or not i've traveled some outside but can't say that i've spoken to all the people or found out so of course it's a it's a you know complex issue what countries think about each other but interesting for bucky to say that basically there's the people of

you know, just even beyond America, just the people of their country.

And he's saying that there's a distinction between the people of a country and what the government does, because sometimes the grunge moves without any individuals or most individuals support.

So what does Bucky point to as how we got to this point?

It's a

longer story than one paragraph, obviously, but just to kind of point out one way that he narrates it.

writes as the allies purchasing agent from 1914 to 1918 morgan's amassing in the u.s jp morgan of the profits of world war one shifted the world capital of the grunge of corporate giants from europe to america and until the 1929 crash assured morgan's dominance of the socioeconomic evolutionary balance of power over human affairs on planet earth

so you gotta go to grunge and do your own side research for the full story from bucky on history from just proto-human history through activities during the 1900s up to what he perceived as the imminent future

But it's just interesting to note that he points out that after World War I and the asymmetric relationship of the United States, essentially during and after that war, it resulted in a transfer of the locus of power to the United States of America.

I'm sure people have debated that with people coming down on both sides, but whatever the situation is or isn't, it's changing.

So then in the second section,

because many of the invisible supranational corporations manufacturing facilities are presently located on usa geography and the invisible giants armaments objectives require 10 years lead time the colossus has now of necessity placed its initial armaments orders in the usa situated factories capitalism's supranational corporate colossus also finds its most convenient and invisibly expedient

continue doing its business under the name united states which is easy for it to do effectively first quite simply by hoisting the american flag in front of all of its factories and seconds by pulling the vital strings of the finance shackled and lobby locked congressional puppets to make them pass the requisite legislation thus the colossus now early 1982

has in production the necessary first things first of its ultimate 10-year, multi-trillion dollar procurement, world published as being USA national defense activity.

So how did we get here with the way that we spend, spending the way we do?

And rather than speculate, which I really don't try to do because I don't know what I don't know, I wanted to look in the records, the public records, which is a truly American and honorable tradition of searching for public records and where there's a gray zone, pushing for transparency.

So I looked in the congressional records for mentions of Bucky.

And this is not all of the...

records there's a few mentions including a few court cases that were kind of interesting but i'll just pull out a few and uh list them in three orders because there was at least three epochs of congress that heard about bucky in one way or another so here's in 1972 so it's kind of cool that this reference was right in that you know europe 72 grateful dead period here's i guess honorable tenno roncalio from wyoming on five nine seventy two

And they wrote, As odd as much an echo of science fiction as this may sound, our continued existence as a power to be reckoned with, but moreover as a country strong and wealthy enough to support our people, may shortly depend on our discovering absolutely new and as yet untried sources of energy.

This is not my suggestion alone, but also that of several renowned experts and inventors such as the famous R. Buckminster Fuller.

In a recent speech before the students of the University of Colorado, Fuller suggested some of the ways in which this might be done.

Not only must we devise new energy sources, but we must create ways in which the energy we do use might be used sparingly and might also be conserved.

student dennis d metesky was so inspired by mr fuller's speech that he wrote an extended account of it for the denver post of last sunday it is my pleasure to insert this account as well as the imaginative suggestions from mr fuller from which it contains into the record at this time so nice just a side reference but before i get to that um reference

there was actually another reference to bucky in that um same issue and so that one read as development it's why we're walking by joel kimmons education director of american freedom from hunger foundation

and it was written racism while hardly addressed sufficiently as a worldwide issue is at least acknowledged imperialism is unpopular even economic growth for its own sake is at last being questioned as a valid national objective as buckminster fuller has said

you can go to the moon and under the arctic ice you can make the world work so how interesting that these issues are still so important to bring up today in 2021 and it just sets the frame for these kinds of access to the records and studying through history and the really important dialogues that have happened in the past to make sense of what bucky's suggestions are for the current day so what did dennis write

These are just a few of the paragraphs because it's a bit longer than this, but it was written, Buckminster Fuller has dedicated his life to charting the world's resources and has found there's enough to go around.

And if these resources are used efficiently, everyone in the world can be put on a higher standard of living than any of us know now.

Nice, still totally true.

Second paragraph.

A good example of doing more with less is copper wire.

At first it could transmit one voice, then four, then sixteen, until now it carries thousands.

The transatlantic cable took tons and tons of copper.

Now a single satellite does many, many more times.

More work.

using an infinitesimally small amount of copper, the rest being available for recycling.

So pretty cool.

It's like this supply and demand between the resources and our technologies because our physicals, the things that we make, they will require physical hardware directly and indirectly.

So how do we do more with less?

with what we make so that we can have more to recycle and use for making things that we need or conserving where we don't.

But we need to start and re-center with making what we have more efficient and doing more with less because then we'll have more to recycle and figure out new things to do with, including providing for more people.

It seems that our whole problem lies in our unwillingness to try something new or explore other alternatives.

Instead of turning on the ship's seepage systems, we are hanging over the edge watching it sink.

Maybe this is why Fuller wrote a book called Utopia or Oblivion, The Prospects for Humanity.

So...

just like in grunge there's that bifurcation metaphor is it going to be sink or swim you know which way America that kind of Bucky framing is um pretty interesting okay that was 72. here's in the records in 1980. this is by Honorable Robert W Edgar of Pennsylvania

don't have to tell the people around and this is all just entered into the congressional record i don't have to tell the people around philadelphia who buckminster fuller is in fact no one on earth needs to be told who bucky fuller is but you of all people know him for he choose to make philadelphia his center for operation he is a universal timeless citizen if there ever was one

Perhaps some of you were lucky enough to hear Bucky on Christmas Day.

He was interviewed for an hour on public radio, and as usual his discourse was full of the charm of unexpected revelation.

At one point he was asked how he defined environment, and he said, well, I was thinking about that back in 1928, and I wrote a little poem about it.

It went like this.

environment i think must be all that all there is sorry i'll restart environment i think must be all there is that is but me the universe i think must be all there is but me and me so that's a poem

A simple little rhyme, but like Bucky himself, deceptively simple.

It's the realization of the peculiarly unique individual that you are and its total connection to everything else in creation that endows environmental education with its wonder and urgency.

That accounts for the hold it exerts over susceptible people and the way it is carving its own course and widening its channels throughout our whole human scene.

so nice bucky poem getting entered into the congressional record pretty cool and then also it reminded me of active inference and the free energy principle where you have the agent in the niche so that's like the tet you know the blanket states sense and action and then the internal is the agent and the generative model and then the niche is everything else so once you've got those two the generative process for the system of interest

what it encloses the boundary and then the outside that's universe so he's defining what there is to separate oneself off from the universe but also respect the totality of it and we'll come back to this idea in uh the end of this live stream

that was in 1980 where bucky got a poem into the congressional record and then here's the one of the last relevant ones i could find this one was just a beauty this is in uh uh i guess late march 1993. mr grassley quote mr president

Buckminster Fuller once said the following, When I am working on a problem, I never think about beauty.

I think only of how to solve the problem.

But when I am finished, if the solution is not beautiful, I know it is wrong.

Mr. President, the budget resolution we just passed is not beautiful.

It is ugly.

And therefore, according to Buckminster Fuller's evaluation, this budget is wrong.

so i don't know what the budget was so spare any uh political interpretation it's just a beautiful example of uh the uh appeal to bucky argument by bucky argument by aesthetics um

don't know how well this worked out for Mr Grassley in this situation or whether it worked out for the country or not or whether we could have maybe even passed something that was better than the one that was being discussed by Grassley who knows but great use of the Bucky quote so to close the Grunge section how do we scrunch the Grunge so how do we move through this face

the only happily promising recourse of each human individual is to our highest intellectual faculties and their mutual ego deflated unselfishly loving preoccupation with comprehensivity and our employment of the most powerful tools of all so we have a preference and we need to comprehensively employ the following tools a through G a

The family of generalized scientific principles governing the operational design of eternally regenerative universe itself.

So that's something there's been a lot of interesting discussion on in the Trim Tab group about what are these generalized principles?

Are they first principles of our own experience?

But how are those...

Perhaps influenced by our culture or our development, which experiences we've had access to.

So are those the principles or how would we know that we found them or that one is generalized enough?

Just a lot of related questions.

B.

comprehending and effectively employing synergetics with the books Synergetics and Synergetics II, presenting the comprehensive, omni-imageable mathematical coordinate system employed by nature, thus avoiding the mentally debilitating, vast majority of humanity excluding, quasi-mathematical coordinate system employed by present-day science.

So, Bucky going hard on the XYZ Cartesian coordinate system, saying it's quasi-mathematical and debilitating and remains to be seen.

Sometimes synergetics is aspirational in terms of what it believes people could unlock if they really thought of this way of geometry.

Maybe it'd be easier to learn as a child or something like that.

So it'd be cool to see that kind of synergetic education.

Just test this hypothesis.

B, let's educate people this way.

C,

Comprehending the major objectives and operating strategies of the major opposing power structures of world politics, their present status quo, and probable future trending.

So in B, he's saying one route is we can learn synergetics, both

early in life but also just at any stage and hopefully there's many accessible ways to get into synergetics and tensegrity i think that's one of the coolest things is when it's like the ground floor of synergetics is the coolest it's all about the tet it's just about learning more about how the tet works so i think that's what also helps it be not something that has to be just learned from birth or at a super esoteric level but to connect those generalized

ways of thinking about education and b to c it's like you also have to figure out what is the operations that are ongoing what are the goals the objectives and the ways in which different power structures are compressing and in tension with each other we can just do a tensegrity model and not judge right or wrong but understand how to act in the system d

comprehending the fundamentals of economics of wealth versus money of the principal features and functioning of industry banking and securities so d is related to c here so it's not just about the geopolitics it's about the the tokenomics the economics the game theory about wealth money value functioning of financial systems which of course are changing

were changing in the 1970s when i believe the gold standard was like finally disconnected from money in 1972 and then here we are coming up on 2022 where maybe there'll be some type of crypto regulation or some new type of financial regulation it could happen i don't speculate about specific laws but it's just about these 50-year cycles and again 1971 what happened the

1972 what happened how is that going to influence our currency 50 years after and how does that time scale just even though we know it's going to be a continuum of influence how does that help us focus and look back through deep time and plan through deep time e comprehending the educational system in general as well as the discovery of the shortcomings of science engineering and education in general so this is really tying it back to e for education

f synergetically comprehending what it is all about as propounded in critical path and this book grunge of giants and discovering what our options are to confront imminent race disaster so that's the critical path framing that it's critical as in it's really important it's critical like phase change and then it's uh critical like we have to be interrogating it there's all these different ways to think about critical path g

the individual discovery of god by a vast majority of human individuals not the discovery of religions but the discovery that each and every individual has an always instantly open no intermediary switchboard authority to contend with no interference of any kind direct hotline to god i.e the weightless non-physical communication occurring teleologically between the differentially limited weightless non-physical

temporal special case mind of the individual human and the comprehensively integrated macro micro unlimited weightless eternal generalized mind of god so that's the ultimate technology armor of god and belief and faith which he differentiates as well in his work and that's what helps us scrunch the grunge among other things

One of those technologies that Bucky brings up in Grunge is, and also in this upcoming Playboy interview, is the world game.

So just thought it was cool.

Here's a PNAS paper from 2018 called Forecasting Innovations in Science, Technology, and Education.

And it's written...

Computational models are particularly useful if they are combined with high-quality data and if they are widely used and understood.

As early as 1960, Buckminster Fuller proposed the World Game to address the world's problem through a holistic and anticipatory systems approach.

The game used Fuller's Dymaxion map to visualize resources, trends, and scenarios.

It was meant to be accessible to everyone, not just experts.

Therefore, decisions could be made collectively and the results could be used by anyone.

That's pretty cool.

It, of course, is reminiscent of some of the experiments in governance and analytical dashboards and collective decision-making experiments, collective intelligence.

It's totally happening now.

And Bucky was 50 to 60 years ahead of his time, 61 years ahead of his time.

The world game that Fuller envisioned was to be a place where individuals or teams of people came and competed or cooperated to, quote, make the world work for 100% of humanity in the shortest possible time through spontaneous cooperation without ecological offense or the disadvantage of everyone.

So this is like serious games.

It's like war gaming, like with a red team and the blue team and the kinds of strategy that you can train up and foster in that kind of a game setting.

It's about analytics and dashboards.

it's about distributed collaboration uh it's just so interesting what bucky was thinking about and the ways that he was implementing what he was learning like the ability to make for example a map projection that didn't at least geographically distort the size of land that's the dymaxion plus it conveys the tetrahedral world view because of there's a lot of reasons but ranging from the spherical modeling to

some of the other advantages that you get from having the world in this kind of a shape.

Breakdown to design as anticipatory design science.

So cybernetics and the ability to plan, we're designing interventions, we're steering that ship.

So we're making decisions now that bifurcate us one way or the other.

all of this comes together in world game and i've never participated in a world game but if there's some one happening i think that'd be pretty cool have like a world game culture

then here was just a few graphics and visuals that i found while researching world game today so this is um not sure what year it's from but it's the world game that was held at the university of pennsylvania and just nice big font play the world game you know hyphenate but you can hyphenate when there's three lines to four but other than that could get a little messy

well done with a shape of a tet and then down there on the bottom right was a graphic i had never seen with this four so nice again usage of the four with four pieces art

design, archive, conversations.

So that's pretty cool.

I think that's a nice model for some of the things that we're seeing happening right now with communities of practice online.

But again, more generally, serious games, wargaming, all these issues, collaboration games,

innovation games, innovation communities, all these things could use these four dimensions.

And then this was from this tetworld.tripod.com site, a kind of psychedelic graphic where there's

maybe like an IMAX.

I don't know if you're inside of it or outside of it, but it's like this tet shape, truncated tet with the Dymaxion map.

And then there's school rooms around it.

So maybe sometimes you're at the control deck, you're playing the world game.

Other times you're in the classroom studying or learning or interacting, doing something different.

So you're not always at the world game terminal because it feels like when we're always plugged into the world game,

We don't have the time away from the game, but the game is just meant to be dipped into in this setting.

And then there was a few nice Tet, as you might predict, from a site called Tet World.

But that was a nice Tet site.

Alright, now on to the last piece with the Playboy interview.

Okay, so...

sorry for sensitive eyes this is the cover of playboy in february 1972 and then on the right side is the playboy interview with r buckminster fuller that describes him as a american architect systems theorist author designer inventor and futurist and then i think this is the uh a screenshot of the picture of the printing of the playboy

where it looks like that same title picture triptych of Bucky is opposite why I smoke Vantage.

So cigarette ad.

Okay, so top left.

Playboy, is there a single statement you could make that would express the spirit of your philosophy?

Fuller says, I always try to point one thing out.

If we do more with less, our resources are adequate to take care of everybody.

All political systems are founded on the premise that the opposite is true.

We've been assuming all along that failure was certain, that our universe was running down, and it was strictly you or me, kill or be killed as long as it lasted.

But now in one century, we've discovered that man can be a success on his planet, and this is the great change that has come over our thinking.

So he's contrasting zero-sum economics with that sort of Malthusian slash one interpretation of Darwinian

of selection happening with limitation and he's saying well we figured out through industrialization via generalized principles that we're pretty much able to actually provide for just the number of people on this planet it's not like we have to provide for infinite people we have to provide for however many billion so that's something that we can tackle if we actually want to it's not something that is just some asymptote that will never be achieved it's not like it's a one over x function it's like how are we going to take care of people

Playboy, and you're saying that man is on the point of discovering that role.

Fuller, I think he's just discovering himself in his full significance.

The child in the womb is completely innocent and completely looked out for.

Then he comes out and has to do his own breathing.

Then he gets to his feet and has to do a little more.

He takes on a little more responsibility and gains in self-discovery.

Well, man is just now coming out of the womb of what I call permitted ignorance.

The average man is beginning to realize why he is here in universe.

That is exactly what young people are continually asking.

When I talk to them, being a comprehensivist instead of a specialist, I find that they speculate and discover they probably do have the function that I'm talking about, which is comprehensivity, and suddenly they change completely.

I find that we're in a moment of fantastic self-discovery and are approaching an entirely new relationship with our universe.

So pretty interesting describing that, that Europe 72 phase transition in self-discovery.

What is the year 50 years after influenced by because of what happened in what he's describing and how is what we're doing influencing 50 years out?

Here, I'm not going to read Fuller's answer, but it's asked by Playboy.

How does it make you feel to know that your own work has been used for military purposes?

Does it disturb you to realize that Russia is encircled by geodesic domes housing American radar installations?

So read the interview for Bucky's answer.

Or look at it here.

Playboy.

often speak of how impressed you were with america's production capacity during world war one were you inspired by the military then fuller i was part of a world that was highly biased that knew very little of quote the enemy propaganda effects on the young men were very high it seemed to be a question of bad people trying to destroy good people

went into the navy and i learned a great deal from the equipment that was being used the boats we used could have served constructive purposes as indeed many did once the war was over and then there's more history provided but that's just really interesting how bucky thought about the military in his time here's a few really interesting quotes so on the top left

We've always played musical chairs in our society.

We start with 100 people and 99 chairs, and we keep eliminating chairs.

The kind of change I'm talking about is when you begin with one chair and end up with 100.

Every time the music stops, more people are sitting down.

When there was only one chair, you might have felt pretty damn exclusive when you sat down.

But now we know that for the first time in history, the chair manufacturer can make enough for everyone.

It's going to be a different game.

Playboy.

It won't be much fun for the people who were used to winning.

Fuller.

That's true, of course.

I used to say that the world game I was proposing had no opposition.

I was incredibly wrong, because you have to play against a formidable number of things.

Once I worked it out like a football team, I had 11 important players, such as fear, unfamiliarity, inertia,

ignorance was quarterback what about greed playboy fuller he played center so that's how bucky was thinking about the games the serious games war games that he was playing then on this bottom quote that brought me to a severe analysis of industrial society and i saw that if i could go 50 years ahead everybody would leave me alone

And that's exactly the way it happened.

I was allowed to do anything I wanted and people said, well, you're very amusing, but obviously I can't take you seriously.

But because I deliberately got to living and thinking 50 years ahead on a comprehensive basis, I inadvertently got myself into a strange position.

I began to live on that frontier and it was like any wave phenomena.

I was living where it was cresting and things happened to me long before they happened to the rest of society.

So that's related to Bucky being described as a futurist sometimes.

But again, here we are 50 years after that interview that is happening and we're just resonating with what Bucky thought, past, present, future, adding our own perspective, contributing to the geometry and the beauty of all the perspectives on what Synergetics is.

Playboy, a moment ago, you mentioned the world game, Fuller.

Here's his direct answer, which is pretty, how he navigates towards it.

only way we can get somewhere is by having a completely different way of seeing our world in informational approach i saw that back in 1927 i could see the big changes coming i could schedule many of them plot them out by means of various curves showing invention lags showing the fallout from the new production i began to play the game of looking at the total earth as i was taught in the navy

The Navy was absorbed in this kind of thinking, surveying the Earth in source of resources and advantage.

So I asked, what is the value of a war game?

And clearly the answer was that you pay no attention to sovereign boundaries.

You transcend them.

And I said, I'd like to have the same transcendental advantage of looking at the world and its resources, but I'd like to see how to use those resources to do more with less.

And that's what brought me over to the idea of a world game.

So that's how he cybernetically navigates from needing a shift in perspective through his experience in the Navy and what he learned from some of their best practices as a high reliability organization down to that's what brought him to the idea of a world game, which we'll return to.

I mean, I guess that was why we...

had it at the part before the interview, but we talked a little bit about it.

We can return to what it might look like in the future too.

So again, they're talking in 1972.

And then Playboy asks, isn't 1985 a very short timetable for the kind of fundamental historical change you foresee?

And Fuller writes, 1975 is still a long way off, let alone 1985.

When you get to 1975, you'll hardly be able to remember sitting here in 1971.

It will seem so far back.

It's a very strange thing, as things happen and changes occur, how quickly society says, of course that's obvious, and, oh well, that's the way it always was.

if you say to somebody i prognosticated that they'll tell you that everybody knew it that's very very common but the fact is that man is continually being surprised he doesn't dream of the changes that come in his lifetime but the minute they occur he develops a marvelous ability to take them for granted so let's transpose these numbers into the 2020s 2025

is still a long way off let alone 2035. when you get to 2025 you'll hardly be able to remember sitting here in 2021 it's classic stuff and how quickly society changes or that's the way it always was we've seen different regions change their behavior and norms in the us and globally so much in the last few years

And there's things that are like, duh, today.

And there's things that we're still learning the hard way and the easy way and just the tragic way.

So.

this is so applicable and then this part about humans being continually surprised that's tying also back to kind of cybernetics and active inference and reducing your surprise about what individuals are going through and what society is going through but he's saying things are happening so fast because we're in this exponential phase of whatever this

killingly killing re living re epigenetic bifurcation landscape whatever the force is that's driving that forward that's either going to be utopia or oblivion the name of his book then whatever's driving that the bifurcation landscape and the imperative that is already left the station then this one on the bottom right fuller something hit me very hard once thinking about one little person could do

Think of the Queen Elizabeth again.

The whole ship goes by and then comes the rudder.

And there's a tiny thing on the edge of the rudder called a trim tab.

It's a miniature rudder.

Just moving that little trim tab builds a low pressure that pulls the rudder around.

It almost takes no effort at all.

So I said that the individual can be a trim tab.

Society thinks it's going right by you, that it's left you altogether.

But if you're doing dynamic things mentally, the fact is that you can just put your foot out there like that and the whole ship of state is going to turn around.

So I said, call me trim tab.

Classic story retold many times by Bucky written on his gravestone, his epitaph, call me trim tab.

Really important idea.

little bit reincarnated through the trim tab book club and it's just an archetype that everybody can think about and wonder about how they're trim tabbing it's like the butterfly effect but the butterfly effect is often raised to mean just

that there's unpredictable consequences in the future and that things that are super, super rare, like again, a hurricane happening or not because of just one thing as if you could isolate the causal impact of just one part of a complex system.

So it's a little bit of a disinfo framing instead of focusing on like the mode or the most likely outcome, the most likely diffusion.

So the rudder and the trim tab

brings it back to agency and our capacity to choose and to act which is completely different than the oh it's random it's the butterfly effect we'll never know which is reified in all the time travel movies

And then another, at least left-right piece on the rudder is the rudder's constrained to left and right.

And then there's other features that make the ship go in different directions.

And a ship can only go to the left or to the right.

Maybe a spaceship can go in more dimensions.

And then if the rudder tilts to the left,

then the ship is going to go to the left.

And then if the rudder goes to the right, then the ship is going to go to the right.

And it's interesting to think about what is the trim tab doing relative to the ship?

What is the rudder doing relative to the ship?

And then closing out this Playboy section, there was Buckminster Fuller's Self-Disciplines, which is apparently from Chapter 4 in Critical Path, but they're just nice.

So we'll look through them because it's kind of like, what can we do, you know, for our country?

What can our country do for us?

What can we do for each other?

All those important questions on July 4th.

And here were the self-disciplines that Bucky wrote.

So one, yeah, and I don't want to always, I just want to read him directly, but oftentimes it doesn't have to be about just the fact that he's a male or that like in the previous paragraphs.

So what?

Use myself as an experiment to see what, if anything, a healthy young male human of average size, experience, and capability with an economically dependent wife and newborn child, starting without capital or any kind of wealth, cash savings, credit, or university degree could effectively do that could not be done by great nations or great private enterprise to lastingly improve the physical protection and support of all human lives.

So he's saying, what affordances and possibilities do I have as just a regular person?

How can I out scrunch the grudge?

Two, commit all of my productivity towards dealing only with the whole planet Earth and all its resources and cumulative know-how.

Observation of my life to date shows that the larger the number for whom I work, the more positively effective I become.

Thus, it is obvious that if I work always and only for all humanity, I will be optimally effective.

Pretty nice inspirational quote by Bucky.

Like the higher our goal, the bigger the delta is, the more tension cybernetically there is, maybe the faster we achieve it or the more effective we can be.

It's like a jet ski with a faster boat or something like that.

Three, seek to do my own thinking, confining it to only experientially gained information.

So kind of a short Buckyism about a commitment to respecting his own perspective and also other people's perspective and not judging beyond the experience that he gets, which includes information from other people.

Four, seek to accomplish whatever is to be attained in such a manner that the advantage attained would never be secured at the cost of another or others.

So it's kind of like saying whatever path you decide, you can't result in a net loss for someone else.

So just because you can make some money building some pipeline or environmental modification, if that ends up

having a negative effect on other people your project is not cool it's not good to go on that project you're you're doing something wrong so how do we determine negative effects or what happens if everything has a negative effect for somebody that's the question of working together five seek to cope with all humanly unfavorable conditions by searching for the family of relevant physical principles involved

focus on the conditions for humanity.

We're living in the niche, so let's focus on the niche.

The niche is physical and informational.

Just like nature is, it is nature.

It's the rest of universe except for us.

So let's figure out the general physical principles like thermodynamics.

How are we gonna support people who are in cold climates or warm climates?

We wanna think about thermodynamics in order to build best for all these people.

Six, reduce my inventions to physically workable models and must never talk about the inventions until physically proved or disproved.

So this is kind of like a self-discipline, really more for him than for most people, saying that he's committed to making physical objects that model his inventions.

uh ideas with his inventions and then also this is a little bit more of a general principle to not talk about the inventions until they're proved or disproved physically so he didn't um he didn't release drafts until he had versions that he thought were really demonstrable of some general principle that he wanted to convey so that's kind of a cool design philosophy and about

not announcing something or before it's completed seven seek to reform the environment not the humans i am determined never to persuade never to try to persuade human humanity to alter its customs and viewpoints so he's a niche modifier

saying that it's better to just have people follow the pheromone trail and the information and the incentives as the environment lays rather than to coerce or persuade eight never promote or sell either my ideas or artifacts or pay others to do so all support must be spontaneously engendered by evolutions integrating of my inventions with the total evolution of human affairs kind of like an open source mentality

nine assume that nature has its own gestation rates not only for the birth of each new biological component but also for each inanimate technological artifact so there's this lag gestation idea kind of a development of technology

developmental technology, which we're seeing with these evolutionary tech and brain computer interfaces and the way in which technology has this lag period, the cell phone or whatever we want to call it is invented.

And then it becomes adopted at this level and then this level.

And have we seen all the implications of cell phones being adopted around the world?

No, we haven't.

So that's still in the gestating phase.

10 seek to develop my artifacts with ample anticipatory time margins so that they will be ready for use by society when society discovers through evolutionary emergencies a need for them so a few things in there first is a principle for himself with designing for where you'll need to be rather than designing super narrowly for where we are

So that's a really cool way to think about that navigational and anticipatory and sensemaking or wayfinding approach to design and synergetics and tensegrity.

It's like where we'll need the solution, we want to intersect with it.

let's not solve the current moment.

So let's understand the current state of the world and where things are heading.

And then we have this vectorial way to look at where the causes are going to clash or where a risk surface might open.

Like if it looks like we're evenly protected on a border that needs even protection,

And right in the snapshot, it's all good, but you know the direction that each guard is heading, you can see where a gap might open.

So how can we take that sort of military way of doing anticipatory behavioral allocation and design, and then think about supporting everyone?

Well, are we discovering now that it's emergence through emergency?

That we have a need for this kind of efficiency?

11 seek to learn the most from my mistakes so nice and short okay then here's the last um non-closing slide and then the the second half of his self-practices so 12. seek to decrease time wasted in worried procrastination and to increase time invested in discovery of technological effectiveness

So this is kind of like early work slash life hacking slash deep work.

I don't know, saying don't worry, don't procrastinate, spend more time making more efficient ways of working.

So something...

everyone's probably working and struggling with but he had as a principal and he was already dealing with that kind of cognitive overload and just total signal fragmentation and prediction fatigue and uncertainty all these kinds of things that threaten cognitive security today Bucky was experiencing them earlier because he was having like a different informational input obviously had a different way of thinking about things 13

seek to document my development in the official records of humanity by applying for and being granted government patents it's kind of something bucky did and a lot of post-buckyites did is this patent game which i've never done a patent so i just don't know too much about it but of course i've seen some cool patents don't know much about it though 14.

Above all, seek to comprehend the principles of Eternally Regenerative Universe and discover how humans function in these principles.

Also kind of classic Bucky, just general and specific.

You got to understand how the grunge came to be specifically and the general principles because the current snapshot of the grunge is not how it's going to change.

So we can't just solve it in the current moment.

We have to be thinking about our critical path to out scrunch through time and space.


UNKNOWN:
16.


SPEAKER_01:
Is 15 missing?

I don't know if I didn't crop it correctly or it's missing.


UNKNOWN:
16.


SPEAKER_01:
Seeks to comprehend the full gamut of production tool capabilities, energy resources, and all relevant geological, meteorological, demographic, and economic data.

So early big data Bucky saying you just need to comprehend, if not directly have the data sets and modeling for all these things.

data analyses so that your world game can be the best simulation, digital twin, serious game, war game.

You need all these kinds of info.

Slow timescales, short timescales, geophysical data, human data, social demographic data. 17.

Seek to operate only on a do-it-yourself basis and only on the basis of intuition.

So it's kind of going into the DIY, open source, OSINT area, saying do it yourself, figure it out yourself, but also look at the generalized principles and learn from other people.

18.

Plan for my design science strategies to advantage the new life to be born on Earth.

Life born unencumbered with the condition reflexes so prevalent today.

So he's saying design for the future people who haven't yet been born.

That's sort of the two sets of people, right?

Those who have been born, those who haven't been born.

So let's design for both of them. 19.

Commit wholeheartedly to the above and pay no attention to, quote, earning a living in humanity's established economic system.

Yet find that my families and my needs are provided for by seemingly pure happenstance and always only in the nick of time.

This is one of Bucky's commitments to, quote, not earning a living, but it's pretty cool and interesting story how, of course, he did earn a living. 20.

I sought to operate only on a do-it-yourself basis and only on the basis of intuition.

17 and 20 look like basically the same.

Not sure if that was on purpose. 21.

I oriented what I called my comprehensive anticipatory design science strategies towards primarily advantaging the new life to be born within the environment controlling devices I was designing and developing because the new lives would be unencumbered by conditional reflexes that might otherwise blind them to the potential advantages newly existent within the new environment control systems in which they found themselves beginning life.

so that's also super similar to 18. i'm not sure quite about this list but it's just unpacking what it means to have design be anticipatory and to also like influence education early but education is for everybody so i think the mind can be plastic enough to change within a lifetime

maybe there's another level of plasticity between lifetimes.

So that's why he wants to focus on synergetics education for everybody, which is a cool notion.

Then, just since it's the 4th of July, and if anyone's watching live, they can write something in the live chat, but I was just going to close on this slide with a drawing, I don't know when I made it, probably in 2020, of some of the Bayesian graphical network type models that we use in Active Inference.

having that superimposed as the generative model and the policy selection model of a brain, so sort of embodying this brain-mind model process duality that's so mystifying about the brain and having that

higher frequency american flag so inside and out the agent and the niche there's this concordance but also the stripes are kind of like harmonizing with each other but they don't overlap so maybe even there's times where the generative model is discordant with the niche more times than not what does that look like

when it disagrees more often than not.

And then there's just a few questions that it's not always about politics.

It's not always about hot takes.

So I don't just intend any of these things to be just questions of today or referencing any specific view on these questions, just trying to be neutral or prompting questions that are like synergetics and active inference ways that we can actually think ahead 50 years, because sometimes the short horizon

and the extreme context leads to just unhelpful decisions being made.

So kind of an active inference type question is, what do we expect our generative model of the United States of America to be like in 2071?

And so that's looking ahead 50 years from now, just like today we went through like a few things that were in that 1971 to 1972 period.

which was kind of funny how they all actually lined up on that like one or two years.

Well, we're kind of in that exact one or two years.

Second half of 2021, who knows what's going to happen in 2022, of course.

So what are we expecting our model to be?

Which does also entail a generative model of the niche.

So what do we expect?

Because what we think is what we act as if that will be likely towards, or if there's high uncertainty, maybe there's other failure modes of cognition, like just paralysis.

So what do we expect?

How sure are we about that?

All these are important questions for individuals, relationships, teams, states to figure out.

what are our preferences over sensory outcomes so it's not on this diagram of the generative model but in active inference it's not reinforcement learning so it's not that everything gets boiled down to value or utility which is often the case in reinforcement learning

it's kind of like a GDP way of looking at the country.

Like it's about economic variables or it's about reward, one scalar number that captures the reward.

And that's what we're trying to optimize.

And when we're getting good feedback from rewards and we're learning well.

So in contrast, active inference has like

one part that's pragmatic about pursuing goals effectively and then one part that's epistemic about learning what needs to be discovered and so minimizing the free energy entails jointly minimizing those two which is why active inference kind of rethinks that explore exploit or maybe even conserve versus progress or change uh dialectic

but where active inference breaks the symmetry and actually chooses policies is with preferences so we have to have preferences over our sensory outcomes as individuals multi-scale active inference agents so what are our preferences what do we actually prefer at this point in the multi-level system of governance that we're in then the third one

what are our individual and collective affordances and how do they map onto hidden world states so in active inference again not really uh directly shown in this graphic is the way that policy is selected is

by conditioning that estimate about outcomes on policies so policies are selected from a set of affordances affordances are like possibilities it's not just an economic affordance it's like an ecological affordance which is a little bit of a different body of literature but again it reflects that move from what's the economic affordance you know what can the state spend or go into debt or whatever

versus what can we afford like socially in terms of our social capital that shouldn't just be seen as a secondary kind of capital to das capital it should be like our affordances structure the choices that we're willing to make and then also an active inference

one's choices one's affordances their the policies that they end up choosing and enacting through actions those don't directly influence world states they actually influence the b matrix which is the way that the hidden world states change through time so we can't just act at one time step and have it change that time step

it has to change, the outcomes that we prefer have to be realized over time because of the way that we changed how those states change through time.

That, again, brings us back to what time scale should we expect change to be on?

But we can't just make random actions.

We have to structure our policy decision-making based upon how we're going to be influencing these hidden states in the future.

we need a generative model which is why we have to learn about the grunge in specific and in general um

Four, how will we act, which is to update our action states and infer, which is to update our internal states as to reduce uncertainty.

That's kind of like the imperative of active inference, but those are what we can do.

We can sense whatever we're sensing and then act and infer, which includes a model of ourself and our niche so that we're reducing uncertainty in the future.

And that means sometimes acting to learn things or to reduce our rate of learning.

And then the last one, how will we design and enact a policy for success or for satisfaction?

Because this is what ties together

in action inactive psychology and embodied psychology with design science and art and then policy selection for individuals and for collectives so just things to think about on july 4th i'll just go back to the beginning if anyone has any final comments from the live chat but

Thanks for watching.

This was fun to do on the 4th.

Just happy and respectful day for everybody.

And talk to you another time.

Bye.