SPEAKER_01:
hello and welcome everyone welcome to complexity weekend may 2021 cohort thanks for joining us i'm daniel and i'm here today with one of our awesome facilitators john john is one of the facilitators for our may 2021 complexity weekend cohort and he's going to be doing a session an interactive session or set of sessions with all of you on the concept of purpose and

and how this relates to our activity as participants in human digital ecosystems.

The session and a lot of the details of it are gonna be in the participant single source of truth, where we have all of the program and all the details that you're looking for.

And you can also find John on Keybase at the Keybase name that's in the title of this YouTube video.

And we're going to have an awesome conversation.

Looking forward to just bringing others into this dialogue, John, and just learning from you as always.

So where to begin?

Would you like to just say hello and introduce yourself?


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you very much, Daniel Ari Friedman, for organizing everything here at Complexity Science Weekend.

I'm really looking forward to the event.

It's really an honor to have you give your time to all of us.

I'm learning so much and really enjoying everything.

And I will be facilitating an interactive session on the weekend.

The schedule will be posted, so I hope you guys all join.

And yeah, just looking forward to a great chat with you to help grow an understanding and to help other people to generate interest in everything that we do here.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

So maybe introduce yourself to the participants.


SPEAKER_00:
So my name is John Alexander Sinman.

I'm a futurist.

I am an international development, economic development consultant and a project manager by qualification.

I would say as far as my skill sets, I'm mostly a relationship builder.

I'm a strategist.

And I work in innovation.

I currently work in public policy.

That's where public policy and tech intersect.

And my interest is in driving a safe and prosperous technological revolution.

I've been working 15 years in Africa, mostly doing international business and economic development work.

I've worked in consulting for a development bank.

And my background, I studied economics at UCLA.

My interest was in optimization and developments.

Being a cross-disciplinary person, I also studied a lot of psychology, communications theory.

I touched on some philosophy.

I wouldn't say I have a strong science background, but I have a social science background having studied economics.

So all the work we kind of do here is very interesting in terms of theory.

In 2018, I moved to New York and began my master's of public administration, specializing in management and innovation at Columbia University's School of International and Public Affairs, which was an amazing experience.

last um monday a few days ago so my brain is a bit bruised but what an amazing experience and i highly recommend for all of you guys that are coming from sort of that world of academia and science if you want to go and apply yourself in the outside world to get into a school of public affairs or public health or whatever your focus is in you know that's where the the tires hit the tarmac and so i have that experience but not so much in science so i'm really

Excited to be here and just my current work is around the human digital ecosystem, which I'll be happy to talk about.

There's some overlaps with complex adaptive systems theory.

It's very much related to the live session I'm putting in.

And yeah, I'll be happy to run down whatever stream you find is interesting for our community.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, thanks for that intro.

And the first thing that comes to mind is just how you are first off interested in systems at the intersection of humans and technology, which today just feels like everything.

And so everyone has a perspective and value to contribute there.

And then in your own background, there's

formal and informal there's quantitative and qualitative and so being able to integrate our different experiences just a few out of the infinite opportunities our own path our own trajectory and then also being able to integrate that like on teams is where complexity becomes applied which is what you said at the end which is for those who have perhaps studied it more theoretically or been interested in the topics what does it look like to apply it

So that's something that we should return to in this conversation.

And maybe before we get to the human digital ecosystem definition, just you went on a little bit of a road trip.

So your recent physical journey, what did you do or set out to do or how did that bring you to your journey here?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so...

As I said, I began my master's in New York in August of 2018.

And I came back from a brief vacation to Brazil in January.

I had to escape the New York winters.

and around march um you know we heard that uh harvard had closed their dorms and i was just bracing myself i knew the other ivy leagues would follow suit so we got the notice uh you've got 10 days to clear out your stuff out the dorms and having come from africa it wasn't like i had like family and home i mean my parents live in california so i bought a uh

a conversion van and i drove across the country which was really an amazing gift um i mean there's so many amazing things in america and i highly recommend travel you know just in general not just america anywhere in the world everything you expose yourself to you know go to museums talk to people go to places i mean that's that's really important that we don't just live in books you know and on screens we get out into the real world

And I mean, America really spoke to me.

I decided just as part of my course of study, what do I do to make this a meaningful trip?

So I thought, you know what, like so much of technology was developed in the United States.

So I'm going to try to go to all the sites where technology was created.

You know, there's sort of that secondary and tertiary

know degree of research that we do which is in books and online but there's people out there who are custodians you know of this information at these sites and they're they've done so much more research than what's going to come up for us on a on the internet search you know and you can have that interactive question answer i mean the person who's been to site that then contributes to that wikipedia article it just may be that person on site has only maybe shared

30% of the story, and then that person extracts 10%.

But when you go on site, you can ask all these questions and see all these things, being sort of a primary researcher.

So I saw so many amazing things on that trip.


SPEAKER_01:
yeah you know that that makes me think of modifying our physical environment we're all ecological beings we're all involved in supply chains and that's not so some complexity topics and then just like you pointed out with the wikipedia modification we're also modifying our digital environment like every time you write a message on keybase you're modifying the niche

or you're modifying the environment of somebody else.

And that's going to change the likelihood of them doing different actions or have different actions available to them.

So that kind of sounds like where you're going with this human digital ecosystems idea.

Maybe just where did that come from or what is that exciting?

How is that exciting to you right now?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, okay.

I'll talk about the human digital ecosystem.

Let me see if I can share my screen.

quickly and touch on some stuff that came up on my trip quickly.


SPEAKER_01:
Sure.

Just share it.

I don't see it yet.


SPEAKER_00:
You still hear me?


SPEAKER_01:
Yep.


SPEAKER_00:
All right, so in the upper left corner we have here is me at the Volta Laboratories.

That's where Alexander Graham Bell did a lot of his work in recorded sound and transferred sound.

All of that work eventually became Columbia Records, but it also became The Telephone, which I have featured up over here.

And I'll just go over.

Can you see me scrolling, Daniel?


SPEAKER_01:
Yep, yep.


SPEAKER_00:
This bottom left photo and the next photo, that's when Alexander Bell sent the first noise signal by light waves from his office, his lab on L Street in Washington, D.C., to the Benjamin Franklin School, some 700 feet away.

And over here on the bottom right, that's the first Bell Laboratories in New York City, their first official commercial

um you know uh office and so if we think about it like the way human beings have communicated from early days you know we used to use voice you know obviously our voice in our face and then we used to maybe do little symbolic things with sticks and rocks and leave behind like go this way and not that way but for the long distance people were communicating with um smoke signals and um uh

people were communicating with smoke signals and whistles and drums.

And at some point through wiring, we started selling telegraph signals.

And at some point, you know, with Alexander Bell's pattern of the telephone, we started communicating with voice over long distance.

And then we started to mix in the television with that.

and now we're streaming in photos and with the onset of the internet, you know, like now suddenly we're able to, like our little circle isn't our little village of people we see day to day in the next village that we're making drum beats, telling them come over for lunch or whatever.

I'm able to speak to you over there.

I think you're in Davis and I'm in Laguna Beach and we're able to connect to all these amazing people in our science network all over the world.

I mean,

It's weird how the pandemic hit at the same time that we had the technology that enabled us to do this.

And you guys pulled off an amazing event.

I understand that was your second event because the first one was in person.

I'll just try to talk through a couple of the other photos quickly before I come back to the ecosystem.


SPEAKER_01:
If you want to go through any other photos, yeah, or however you want to...

Where would you like to go?

Or I'm happy to maybe go from the more theoretical idea of the ecosystem eventually to how's that going to play into what a participant does in this ecosystem.

So if you want to do a little more on the idea or you're free to start talking.

Okay, yep, I'll share.

Okay, I see the Jitsi window.

And then you can get whatever you want to share.


SPEAKER_00:
All right, can you see there's a...


SPEAKER_01:
You shared another desktop.

So a little fractal.


SPEAKER_00:
Fractals are happening.


SPEAKER_01:
Fractals and feedback loops.

I could.

Yep, there we go.

Almost.

Okay, so if you want to reshare to a photo, you can do that.

Otherwise, we can continue this way.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

One second.

Let me see.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Also, thanks for those who are watching.

So this is part of the... Go ahead.


SPEAKER_00:
Part of the fun of the digital ecosystem is learning how to use it properly, right?

So all of us, I think the catchphrase of 2020 was you're on Muse, right?

You should make a t-shirt.

You're muted.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep.

Well, nice.

We're on a live stream and welcome to live streaming.

It's fun.

Great.

We see the picture.


SPEAKER_00:
All right, so my trip began actually when I left New York and I went to Philadelphia.

I was at the Benjamin Franklin Institute.

I highly recommend this.

And there was an exhibit there actually with Benjamin Franklin, a painting, right, where he's got the key.

And here's a picture of me holding the key.

And I'm just trying to scroll through.

Suddenly it didn't let me scroll.

And then on the other side of the key, there was a picture, if you can see on the upper left, the kite, you know?

So it was two paintings, one with him in the key and the one with the kite.

And the inscription is really relevant.

It says on the bottom here, he tore the lightning from the sky and the scepter from the tyrants, which really speaks to technology.

You know, the fact that

you know before we harnessed electricity what were we we were working with our hands and manually and i mean very much reliant on europe and as soon as we were able to you know take advantage of that technology we were able to industrialize which was responsible for all of our progress and i i wound up seeing amazing things um i went to the george c marshall center in alabama huntsville and went to where um you know we developed uh missile technology that after

After they were done with that, they helped to launch satellites into outer space.

Here's me at the historic Redstone test site where they launched the first rocket into outer space and then the first man.

This allowed us now to set up satellites.

Of course, as you know, we're all connected now through the satellite system, through data.

Here's me with the NASA scientists.

My trip ended on the West Coast.

Here's me at Bolter Hall at UCLA where ARPANET sent its first message, which was...

Lo, they tried to send login to the Stanford lab, but it crashed after the second letter and became the inspiration for the documentary, Lo and Behold.

So here's 3420 Bolter Hall.

This is the site of the first internet message.

And here's us now having our live stream as a continuation of that.

So yeah, I'll be happy to talk about the human digital ecosystem, right from where we came from and where we are today.


SPEAKER_01:
Wow, pretty fun.

Let's maybe get a little bit specific about our May 2021 cohort.

You mentioned how there's this massive amount of change that has happened to our digital ecosystem.

What does that mean in May 2021?

How can we make the best of what we are going to be experiencing as a cohort?

I know that's a big question, so we can kind of approach it from a few angles, but just


SPEAKER_00:
So let's break that down.

I think the first sort of social networking site was maybe Friendster.

Sorry, I'm a bit old.

I'm 48, Generation X. So I remember when it first came around, we didn't even know what these technologies were, but you could find your friend by their name and connect and suddenly start sending messages to your friends all over the world and then pictures.

And I mean, along came Facebook, we became connected and LinkedIn.

And then suddenly we got used to socializing online and then all sorts of applications, you know, which then became online conferences and schools.

And like, it's strange of,

we reflect how much more and more of our engagement is digital these days.

Whereas before, we had to come in person.

An event like Complexity Science, I'd have to take off five days off work, hop on a plane.

And it's amazing, right?

Face-to-face, in-person events, and I'm sure we're going to have one.

But I became apprised of Complexity Science community through my advisor, Alexis Wachowski,

who's a professor at Columbia and she's the chief technology officer right now, acting head of New York city.

And I had some chats with her again, virtually online.

I've never, it's weird to think I've never met her in person.

All of our classes went on to zoom, you know, a distance learning.

And she said, there's this really interesting event.

I think you should go to some like-minded people.

So I quickly registered.

It was like within the week before I was driving.

So I went up getting an Airbnb in Kansas, having no idea what to expect.

started watching a few videos, doing some readings.

And next thing I know, I'm hopping onto the event and it was such a weird experience, right?

Because it's like, I'm getting an email and then there's this Excel spreadsheet around what's happening where, and I see there's a single source of truth.

And I'm trying to figure out, is this live discussions?

How much of what is happening where?

So I'm watching videos and then

I experienced the Gather space for my first time.

Then the event started, all the live streams, and just for all the people who are new to Complexity Weekend Conference, it's just such a fantastic experience coming in and participating in an online conference and meeting all these amazing people like Daniel and I met RJ and

RJ Corday and Blue Knights and Jen Huff.

And I'm just starting to engage with all these people online.

It's so odd.

We've never really met, but it's amazing how much you can do through video and through discussion and through reading and the fact we can still stay functional even though we're not in person.

It's sort of an emergent experience in itself.

So

Yeah, I think we're practicing.

We're getting used to it, right?

We have to learn as we go.


SPEAKER_01:
We certainly learn by doing.

It's why it's one of our values because we can apply that to walking just like we can apply it to live streaming and hopefully complexity.

And it's like you learn by doing and you learn applying on teams.

We don't learn to walk alone.

And right now things are changing in a way where we're helping each other walk in new ways.

And maybe one of those new ways is of thinking.

And that is complexity, which maybe means many, many things to many people.

So what got you interested in complexity?

Like to pull back one layer before that last time that you attended the weekend, like what got you interested?

And maybe we can start from there.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, well, obviously, my professor, Alexis Wachowski, had recommended it, and she's very bright, so obviously I was open-minded to come and see.

And I think just by nature, I'm sort of an exploratory person, so I started to take a look.

And I think that first weekend, we had that talk by that –

professor from Santa Fe.

He had that t-shirt and it said OM, O-H-M, like from physics, but it had the OM symbol.

Yeah, yeah, it was amazing.

These people are so interesting because they're touching on many different things.

So there's a kind of sort of very interesting, organic, immersive experience happening here that we're all uncovering and discovering as we're going.

So

You know, for me, I suppose I'd say I'm a utilitarian.

Like, I like to make use of things.

I think all of us have to have a reference point that we're starting off at.

So for some people, complexity science is all about going out there and exploring and figuring out what's out there and keep on learning and growing.

And for me, it's more about what can I do with what I know?

You know, what functional purpose does it serve?

As I said, I'm in economic development, so my kind of interest is

What kind of socioeconomic political systems could we create to help enable us as human beings to optimize?

So I'd taken a course in undergrad in the philosophy of science, and there was a book by Thomas Kuhn where he talked about paradigms and paradigm shifts, how science always shifts in its outlook.

And the science I grew up with was very sort of basic Newtonian-like

Here's an object, and what kind of laws can it be subjected to?

And we can use that to predict things.

But there's things like chaos theory, like looking at a cloud or a big rush of water and trying to figure out what direction is it going in.

And chaos is very hard to predict, but we can narrow down out of an infinite set of possibilities what are more probable.

The thing about complexity science, which became so interesting to me, was its ability in terms of its application to sort of make a prediction around like how a snowflake might form or how ants are going to behave under certain conditions or a person riding a horse.

And in my case, what made it very interesting coming into the events, I kind of realized the things we were learning about

complex adaptive systems theory you know that the event itself is a little bit like a system with all of us participants coming in learning how to interact and I thought there must be ways of

figuring out how to build a healthy system, how to make an effective system.

So I started reflecting on this, not just on the event, but on the digital ecosystem as a whole, because so many of us now are doing our work, doing our research, getting educated, buying things, voting, getting our news, socializing.

There's so many things we're doing online now.

I was thinking there must be a way of understanding it from a complexity science perspective.

that would be useful to us.


SPEAKER_01:
great response just to pull out a few things first was that experience of not knowing where to begin and you made the right move you went to the single source of truth you went to the gather because you gotta you gotta go to find out you have to show up to find out who's in the park and you're gonna have to come to gather and show up when it's healthy for you to find out what's happening and gather given the information about the program and the single source of truth and then the other

piece I thought was really nice was how you said you're a pragmatist and complexity theory or simplicity there's so many words we can use and it's going to be different words in different languages and of course we respect that difference in language so what is it that we're really talking about

And there's so many interesting tensions.

Like, is it about the ideas or is it about the systems that we want to have impact in?

So you could work with the river your whole life and know how to build rocks in the river.

And then someone says, well, this is, you know, a steady state attractor and this is chaos and this is turbulence.

And it maps the ideas onto the practice and onto the embodied experience.

And so it's sort of like there's two roads to that.

that road two directions that road you know people who are learning ideas and learning about network theory and then oh yeah that's right social networks and then there's those who are realizing that they're embedded in social networks and then finding that there's ideas that help us generalize so that we can apply so that's really cool how you link that through and at different times in your journey it's like you've been on one side or the other of that road


SPEAKER_00:
yeah well i think um it's i think the question is like like why why science what for right so some people like it helps me grow an understanding it helps me understand what i we don't understand which will help us

more understanding and i think for me like when i first came in on that first weekend and what came up in our first or second live stream was like what exactly is complexity and you'd ask people let's try to define it and i was thinking yes like why are we studying complexity and i started to think like well complex as opposed to simple right so simple things are fairly straightforward and

complexity the thing is like so you say something is complex i thought well something that's simple is just straightforward and simple but complexity must be a spectrum from somewhat complex to absolutely complex right and i was thinking like so what what what what signifies

what makes something more complex or not.

And I was thinking, well, I think the human ability to understand things, that's what makes it complex.

If we can, if it's simple, we know it right away.

As complexity increases, our ability to understand it decreases.

So then I was trying to understand like, well, what's the purpose of looking at complexity at all?

And a phrase got kicked around called sense-making.

And I thought, well, that's what we're doing here.

We're not

trying to understand what complexity is as much as we're looking at complex systems and trying to make sense of them.

I don't know if you want to speak to that.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, it's really interesting.

And I think that's a discussion that we'll have our first live stream, our last live stream, our first CW, our last CW.

What is complexity?

How do we apply it?

How do we learn and communicate it?

And you pointed to sort of one approach, the complex adaptive systems area, where it looks for attributes in the system.

Like it has a lot of subunits, they interact, or it has phase transitions, or it exhibits...

chaotic dynamics of some type that's the complex adaptive systems approach there's another perspective on complexity of many which is the relational insight which is what you brought up with the sense making which is like whoa complexity is that it's not about the complex system is water a complex system i mean h2o but then there's a network no it's actually about how we come to relate

to each other and how we relate with systems and so we're not going around with a you know a marker saying well this is a simple system this is a complex system this one's in between maybe there's a time and a place for that but also there's space for asking how we're relating to systems which opens us up to new ways of

interacting with them so it's it's really cool and it just highlights how sometimes ideas from different fields like ecology or psychology physics they come together when in dialogue in diverse teams having impact on the systems which always go beyond a discipline so cool to hear about the complexity so so so can i ask you i mean obviously we're looking at systems right so


SPEAKER_00:
how do we decide where a system starts and ends, right?

Cause that's sort of our, is our focus in complexity science on systems,


SPEAKER_01:
there's so many awesome systems thinkers in the facilitators and the participants that i think it's a question that's going to be enacted and it's an answer but one thing that comes to mind is facilitators denise and barb and alistair they in the last complexity weekend were raising this question of what is water which is an allusion to this joke about fish in water and they just don't know that they're in water because it's kind of the invariant for them and

and so it's almost like whatever your system definition is if it's like bucky fuller who said the minimal system's a tetrahedron just left it at that just you'll you'll you'll know when you see it um or whether we define every person in a social network it's actually the the border it's the fringe around that that's the water we're in that's what's being taken for granted and so so much of complexity is about talking about


SPEAKER_00:
what is inside outside at the interface of what system it's just such an interesting discussion well so you know we can look at this from so many different levels so obviously we're discussing it and we're also talking about people and their ideas about it um just apropos to the human digital ecosystem um i've just uh searched uh online it says wikipedia um

which is mostly reliable, but it basically says a system is a group of interacting or interrelated elements, and that they act according to a set of rules to form a unified whole.

So I suppose where we decide what the whole is, that's arbitrary.

It's like, what's the whole of water?

Is it the edge of the river?

Or is it also about the sun hitting it, that it's evaporating, or what's being drawn into the surface of it?

I mean, what's an ocean?

those waves are actually a reflection of the bottom of the ocean.

So the thing for me is the question, so it's a system.

How do we know, Daniel, when the system is something that we should look at it from the point of view of chaos theory versus complexity science?


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome question.

And so we heard from Wikipedia editors 2021.

We also have Sean and Jen and others in the live chat giving their thoughts, maybe answering the question, what is the system with another question?

Like Jen just wrote, we draw the boundaries for our own analytical reasons.

What question we are asking generally derives where we put boundaries or how we classify continuous variability, you know, hot days and cold days.

Well,

I mean, kind of, but it's not always just going to be zeros and ones.

And you asked like a really important question, which is how do we go from recognizing a system of interest that we want to have impact in and maybe even recognizing some features of the system of interest?

Like it has a lot of interacting parts.

It has phase transitions.

How do we go from that insight to the right ideas and the right maps across systems so that we can have a useful connection?

because the all by all, a hundred different things, you could say that they're like a hundred things, but it's not really a poetry exercise only.

It's awesome when it is and there's space for that.

But there's other times where you wanna know which system mappings are gonna be impactful or which ones are gonna result in a useful master's thesis or what's gonna result in an innovative startup that's having impact on users' lives.

So there's times where we wanna take that space of the all by all

and constrain that.

And that's the question to ask, which is which features of the system map to which bigger topics like complexity or chaotic systems?

And then how are we going to go back from like the system of interest to the idea of ecosystem thinking?

Whoa, cool.

I like ecosystem.

And then how do we bring it back?

to actually the specifics.

So you've had so much experience in different contexts, different teams, different ecologies, kind of having that team go out, boomerang out, be innovative, but then also how do we drill down?

So maybe you tell us, how do we go from thinking big to drilling down?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, interesting.

That's exactly what I thought.

And I thought, you know, something like often the most useful way of illustrating something is with an example.

So I'm new in this.

Would you give us an example of your work in ecology, maybe with ants or something?

Where do you draw the line?

Can you give us a good example of where you drew the boundary in order to discover something?


SPEAKER_01:
I can give an example from my ecology field research.

So we were studying this red harvester ant species in Arizona, and we were watching the foraging behavior of this focal species.

It has workers that you can see.

They're relatively big.

The nest doesn't move year to year.

They're long lived.

So it's really great for just pulling up a chair and watching.

But at that field site,

we would see other ant species foraging all over the place depending on the time of day and other birds and other interesting stuff so we took the whole richness of that ecosystem but our system of interest was this ant species so while we're watching that ant species we're not trying to copy down everything we're not trying to capture all the information but we're keeping an open mind and so it just reminded me about how sometimes you gotta focus on the task at hand

while also respecting the richness of the system and exactly how to balance that.

How much should you be just narrowing in on just the task at hand as defined?

That's kind of like what sometimes people call first order science.

versus pulling back is this really what we should be measuring or asking and that's like second order science so the right ratio is going to be a situational um it's going to be we have to learn and adapt and figure out how to surf on that wave but for me it was like the trade-off between just what did we already lay out that we have to do and then let's pull back what should we do


SPEAKER_00:
So I think it's really interesting because we're talking about our focus.

In project management, we call that scope.

In your project, you have a deliverable.

You've got a scope according to that deliverable.

So sometimes the temptation is, oh, well, we have so much resource.

Why don't I deliver for my client so much more of what they want?

But then the problem is,

the situation changes and suddenly you can't hit the deliverable because you've been focusing on this other stuff outside the scope so i think a lot of the challenge in science is how do we narrow that focus in order to be effective and the thing is the scientific brain still is like oh but look at all this other interesting phenomena like shouldn't we take note of that as well and i suppose it's a bit of balance and i think maybe sort of keeping two journals which would be like let's focus on the matter at hand but let's put other stuff on the side that we should kind of

Look into and I mean just like I think what what made this very interesting for me is trying to look at complex adaptive systems was um this idea of a fish, you know a school of fish and saying like So firstly it's a system right because there's fish and we can say that that school of fish is the one system we're examining and the fish are

made up of different fish.

They're not all uniform, right?

Each fish is its own entity.

It functions in a way independent, dependent, interdependent, right?

It's got some relationship and it's interacting with the other fish plus the environment.

And fish in a school each have a different position in the school.

So here's a school of fish and sometimes they move as a circular kind of cycle and other times they move

In a straight stream, it's very interesting.

They're either traveling or they're hanging out, just like us, right?

Right now, we're cycling, and sometimes we move towards something together, but they travel according to their needs.

So the question is, how does that school of fish function?

How do we know?

Is it going to go left, right, straight, stop?

If we just wanted to examine that, how could we predict whether a school of fish would go left or right or straight?

So we narrow the system to the fish, and we recognize that there's fish on the periphery, in the middle, on the back, there's fish on the sides.

And we have to understand, say, for example,

Maybe a stimulus was coming from the side.

Maybe a predator.

Maybe a fish saw a shark coming 60 feet away.

So that fish is going to want to communicate to the rest of the school by wiggling, right?

Ah, there's a shark.

There's a shark.

And something in fish language, I don't know how they do it, whether it's electromagnetic stuff or it's purely visual, but that fish maybe communicates to someone, sharp coming from 20 degrees southeast.

approaching at 40 miles an hour we've got eight seconds to react you know like we don't know what it means but the fish to the left and in front and behind see the wiggle and that whole message spreads possibly through the whole school and then that message hits the whole other periphery of the fish and they all maybe say there's a safe passage at 10 degrees northeast and

On a level of 1 to 10, it's a safety rating of 6.

And the fish on the front are like, yes, but there's a safety thing we deemed at 8, level 8 safety.

you know, to the northwest.

And every fish on the periphery, and somehow they ripple back this message.

We don't know how it works, right?

But some way, maybe there's a fish in the middle that's like, guys, we're all going here.

And it ripples and everyone goes, right?

So the thing is like, this is a complex system.

But if we had to understand the rules that each fish uses, so if I'm on the periphery, if I see a predator, I do this wiggle.

And each fish has a rule by which they

behave according to stimulus, right?

There's cause-effect.

If we understood all the rules these fish would work by, then we could figure out how we could maybe predict how are the fish going to react as a school on any one stimulus.

And we could keep on building the model by understanding the rules better and better.

The thing is, the fish are adaptive.

So maybe they see a shark, they know what to do instinctively.

But now they see a human being.

They've never met a human being.

So the question is, how does the fish react to unknown stimulus?

And do they then learn?

And do they adapt?

Oh, this human is feeding us.

Or this human is dangerous.

And how do they teach each other?

And how do they learn?

And then if the human changes.

So that's what serves to make it adaptive, that the fish are able to generate new rules.

So if we could find out the rules of how they form new rules, eventually we could build some kind of model to totally predict everything about these fish.

So if we were a conservationist or a

A fisherman or anything.

We could use this for good purpose, understanding the nature of fish.

I don't know.

I'm just a beginner, so I'm just spelling stuff out.

What do you think?


SPEAKER_01:
Yep, I'm gonna answer with another awesome insight from Jen.

Jen brought up this topic of scope creep, which is something you're probably familiar with as a project manager.

And it's something that there's a tendency sometimes to do in complexity, which is, okay, we're gonna be modeling social networks.

Well, then we probably want all the data and every attribute.

And so knowing how to pare down is something that we're always curious about doing the best way.

And Jen also writes,

sometimes what the other ants are doing shapes constraints and creates opportunities for our target ant colony but is popping up a level to interspecies relationships a different project and it reminds me of those two modes that you just described like the implementate implementing versus sort of pulling back

Because it's not even just that it's a hindrance or an annoyance that we might observe the unexpected and the unknown, especially when we're talking about innovation.

And as you're so interested in futurism, we have to be open for those unknown unknowns.

And then even the known unknowns, which is kind of a funny topic.

And so how do we do that?

Well, to use the fish school analogy, every fish's perspective, literally where they are in the water, is what allows the swarm, the school, to be functional.

If you don't have any eyes on a certain side or the other, you're missing a whole region of space.

And with the fish, it's visual.

It's like, well, if they're all pointing this way, then they're not going to see stuff behind them.

But with humans, it's conceptual.

And so if we don't consider all the perspectives, then there's going to be blind spots.

And maybe it's like driving where you can be going on the freeway and maybe having some blind spots is okay.

But we're in a really unpredictable environment and we need to have everybody not just contributing their perspective, but honestly and authentically belonging to these ecosystems.

So that's a really important point.

And of course, it's awesome that you're bringing these metaphors that might not arise to somebody who had a different background.

So like each time it's explained, each time we return to these questions, what is complexity?

How do we apply it?

It's like a new coat of paint.

So that's pretty cool.

I'm curious about the session that you're gonna be facilitating.

What could someone look forward to in your session or what are you hoping to get out of that session?


SPEAKER_00:
Right.

So actually, my session is very much related to my current work.

So I'll talk about the human digital ecosystem.

I think, yeah, the inception for my idea actually is very interesting.

I walked into Complexity Science Conference and started having this strange experience of, like, where am I?

You know, am I in a live chat?

Am I in some sort of schedule?

Am I in Gather?

Am I in Jitsi?

And it was also like,

I'm also sitting here in an apartment.

I'm hungry.

It was like so many different variables.

Where are the people I'm speaking to?

What's their time schedule like?

And so like so many things like started becoming clear to me.

And I started realizing, well, in a sense, we're kind of like in a system now in the conference.

We're all little parts of a whole.

And I started to reflect on the fact that

with all of us using digital technology to engage and do all these things, we're now forming a system.

And so I'm thinking about us as all parts being connected at this point through our screens.

And so essentially, when it came time to figure out what my independent research project was, and I discussed with my advisor, Professor Wachowski,

I kind of, the first thing I had said was, you know what's funny?

Whenever we talk about the world of tech, no one knows what we're talking about.

It's like, oh, you work in tech?

So do I. What do you do?

Well, I manage a team of coders.

Oh, well, you know, I create, I lay in cables for networks, right?

Sell things on social, you know, networking.

I'm a marketer.

It was like, kind of like, it takes about five to 10 minutes to figure out how

you have nothing to do with each other or where you might overlap.

So I kind of raised to Alexis, I said, well, wouldn't it be nice if we just had like a map, you know, that if someone said, I work in tech, you could just point, well, I do this there.

So she said, well, why don't you build it?

And I was thinking, okay, well, you know, like, great.

But I mean, I'm kind of a bit overwhelmed with studies right now.

But when it came time to think about

what research I was going to do, I thought, let me write something and do research on what tech actually is.

So I wanted to develop a map.

So I don't know, can I share my screen quickly?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, for sure.


SPEAKER_00:
All right, let's see if we can do this.


SPEAKER_01:
Maps, sense-making, maps of meaning.

How do we orient ourselves?

How do we communicate the itinerary?

How do we know where we've been, know where we're going?

Great questions and topics.


SPEAKER_00:
All right, so I'm trying to share my screen.

Hold on, folks, while we navigate through some technological matters.


SPEAKER_01:
this is why one of our participation guidelines is embrace the technology but know its limits and when you're talking to somebody you know there might be a one second lag and sometimes we jump in in that lag or it's easy to misinterpret a frozen screen as somebody's not paying attention and so it's almost like we have to have this deep generative model of

our conversions and be human and accommodating.

Okay.

Take as long as you want, or it's all good.

Or let's just take it.


SPEAKER_00:
I'm looking at a screen that says, choose what to share.

And I'm clicking on entire screen, but nothing is happening.


SPEAKER_01:
Maybe pick a window or maybe you've used your three free screen shares and now Jitsi pro.

No, I'm just kidding.

It's open source, but we're 10 99.

Exactly.

Then it can be really open source.


SPEAKER_00:
All right, it's not letting me share the map.

And I don't wanna dump out of the system, so.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool, but maybe just share what it was or where, again, to kind of return to the facilitated session, like who should come?

What are they gonna get out of this?

What is the map?


SPEAKER_00:
Sure.

So basically I was trying to understand how do we do a map that would represent technology?

And I wasn't quite sure what that would look like, right?

We talked about scoping and where do you draw the line, you know, because what is tech?

It could be things in my brain of how it perceives tech or everything down to the actual

Hardware of your device right input output and zeros and ones and so many different things but so I am taking I took another class called infographics and Our professor Douglas Williamson actually worked for NYPD and he builds all kinds of maps for their dashboards online and by profession He's a cartographer so he

understands sort of the philosophy behind map making and so um he'd kind of told me well if you want to build a map you have to think about all the different elements and how to simplify it so it shows something so i was trying to understand well let's just start off with the basics of what do we know right so obviously here i am with my computer so there's a person and then there's a device and then that device is connected now to other devices so i realized that

we have one map which is of the infrastructure so you know people talk about tech and they think about some big tech company or they think about someone coding but what they don't realize sitting on the planet right now we're all being connected actually physically in a very tangible way

through wires, through cell phone towers, through satellites, through devices to people.

It's people connected to other people and people connected to organizations made up of people.

So I made one map, which is the infrastructure map.

I'm just looking right now at the screen.

It says choose what screen to share.

So unfortunately, there we go.


SPEAKER_01:
We see it and I'll resize it for those who are on live stream.

So just keep it where it is and I'll resize it.

Thanks.

Go ahead though.

Continue explaining it.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

So we have a physical infrastructure map.

I'm going to try to move it around a little bit.

Is it moving on your screen as well?


SPEAKER_01:
It's going to look a little different on live stream.

So just keep it where it is.

It looks fine.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so here where my cursor is hovering on the left, we've got the end user, which is the person.

The person might be at a desktop fixed or on their cell phone or maybe in an audience, right?

And that's just using this to show maybe what a classroom would look like.

And as we cross over this first line here, we're moving over into connectivity.

I'm just going to hover back a little bit.

Actually...

It's showing a different map now.


SPEAKER_01:
Looks like a card game, except you don't know if you're playing it or getting played.


SPEAKER_00:
All right, so we're all playing it and getting played right now.

So these are the elements of the map, right?

So again, on the left, we have...

us it could be you and me right now sitting at our desktop maybe there's other people on their cell phone maybe people are viewing it in a lecture and this next section here is the input output section and i've kind of divided this up in a sensical way where if we go through the middle of it sorry to everyone who can't see it because it's small items but i'll share a link to this we can all check it out later if anyone is interested but we actually have here um this left row is all the

sort of the input items.

So we've got the keyboard, mouse, joystick, maybe a touchscreen, memory stick.

We've got cameras here, scanners, microphones.

On the right side, it's kind of output.

So it might be screens, lighting, a printer, sound, headset.

And each of these

horizontal layers.

So the top part would be physical, the middle part would be visual, the bottom part would be sound.

The bottom side is robotic, which is something completely separate.

So these are all sort of the capabilities of our devices.

And then we have our user devices here.

And that would be maybe a laptop or a

or a tablet, could be a phone, a desktop, or maybe a network device.

So to some extent, we already now have the people on the periphery with their devices enabled.

And as we cross over into this middle section here, which is the connectivity section here at the top, most of us are now on the World Wide Web, which is the internet.

We might be connected through hardware.

It could be a cable, a wired router, a wireless router.

It could be a Wi-Fi system at a cafe or at our school.

Then we have basically satellites or cell phone towers and satellite dishes.

And then on the bottom here, part of that connectivity, we either have software that drives all those devices or there's sort of an intranet.

And then we might have a browser, right?

And all of that

stuff between the physical hardware and the software and the devices transmits information through the World Wide Web.

And on the other side over here, we have a host organization with their servers here.

Daniel, can you follow along?

Is it fairly easy to see?


SPEAKER_01:
Yep.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so the host organization is on the other side, and they might be connected to a third party user.

There might be purview organizations like governments or other bodies that have given permission to purview.

There might also be nondescript users.

And there might also be a browser involved.

And up at the top, there's also ISPs on both sides.

The user has an ISP and the host organization.

And that could be either through the web or could be through your cell phone.

And there might also be an intranet as well.

So using this, I've made another map as a user case in my paper, which I'm happy to show another time.

But using this, we could actually map out the whole physical infrastructure that's connecting all of us right now.

So that actually is the physical infrastructure map.

The other map that is of interest is the application map.

So that kind of explains what's laid out in the physical world of how all of our sounds and our visual image is being transmitted through the system.

Here's the applications map.

So again, it starts off on the left with the users.

And the users will basically have applications

So here's a series of apps.

Here's a video app.

Here's a linking app.

Here's a chat app.

Here's a database app.

So they're looking at a face of an app that then is being provided to them through their ISP, maybe through the web or through their phone.

It might be going through a browser.

And on the other side here, we have a host organization.

So I've got a fictitious host organization called YouKeeper.

and they run all these apps they have their own isp maybe they have a third party user involved so for example if i'm the user here on my cell phone using one two three or four of these apps ukeeper actually has purview of all of my behavior

and is sending me content and information.

So between the two maps, between the digital application map and the infrastructure map, I said, actually, this is a digital ecosystem.

But then I realized you can't have a digital ecosystem without people.

So the fact that people are involved automatically makes it a human digital ecosystem because there's people participating, both

physically and through the applications so i suppose the topic of my thesis was what kind of a model could i present to help facilitators and designers of a human digital ecosystem build and manage a system that just really optimizes everything for everyone involved right because

I mean, we've been so enabled by digital technology now, but we're also hampered.

I mean, if you and I were face to face, we just have a chat, but we spent about 10 minutes before saying, can you hear me properly?

What do you see?

Even now, I can't see what you see.

So there's things about the digital ecosystem that's impacting us in very different ways to the way we've evolved cognitively.

So these are all things we have to figure out.

So I actually came up with a model based on seven parameters.

That if you look at each one of these independently in the way they work with the others, depending on how they're used, they can either make the system healthy and keep it unified, or they could make it an unhealthy system.

And I've defined health as sort of the wellbeing of its users.

So if I'm getting stressed, if I'm getting exhausted, if I'm not achieving what I want to, then it's undermining my health and wellbeing.

If on the other hand, I'm being energized, I'm being empowered, I'm learning great things, I'm socializing, whatever metrics we can use to talk about a human's health, if that digital technology through the apps and the hardware is enabling that, then I could say it's a healthy system.

When every element is optimized, it's an overall healthy unified system.

So coming back to what I'm going to be speaking about today,

the first parameter of my model is something called purpose and i suppose the way we look at this maybe would be like a board game or a video game right so maybe in a video game there would be like this organization that maybe is malevolent right typically in a lot of video games it's like you're fighting some big bad structure with all its

maybe troops or it's zombies.

And then you're the user, so you now are there to survive or to accomplish some task.

So I've kind of tried to explain this parameter of purpose as I, as a participant in the video game, I've got a purpose, right?

It might be to get gold coins or to survive or to defeat the overlord.

But that overlord has a purpose as well, which is maybe to jail me or eat me or whatever it is.

And that purpose could be malevolent or benevolent on both each element's part and then the overall element.

So the thing is, I was saying, to have a healthy, unified microsystem where it might be a video game of me and an overlord.

It could be a microsystem of me and complexity

weekend right where i'm a participant right and you guys are the organizers and like what is it about my purpose and what is it about the purpose of the organization and the purpose of each of these parts that would optimize our engagement so we're each able to accomplish our goals and my point is that these purposes can't be at cross ends

So whatever I'm coming in for and whatever the purpose of the other people, we're not working against each other.

But purpose is such a vague, amorphous concept.

What does it mean?

Is it like my singular objective?

Is it about achieving my values?

Is it my reason for living?

So in my facilitated session, we'll be looking at maybe some examples and trying to understand what's the purpose.

Like I think in science, maybe you can speak to this.

In ecology, we define these purposes as like

This organism is a predator and this organism is prey.

Or these two organisms act in symbiosis.

So each has a purpose that will then determine the nature of their outcome of their interaction.

So basically, I'm looking at it from a human digital perspective of how would the purposes align to optimize their engagement.

But maybe you can speak to a little bit around

the purpose in maybe a system of ants, maybe how one ant and another, or how ants are engaging.

How would you look at purpose?

This is the kind of thing we're going to be doing in the live chat.

I'm going to be drawing on all of you guys' resources to help us understand how could we explain purpose as a parameter so we could use it more effectively in seeing how the system works.


SPEAKER_01:
Nice points.

A few things come to mind.

One is that every agent plays multiple roles.

So, for example, we might think of, oh, well, the bird is probably the predator and then the insect is the prey, except when the bird has died and then the insect is eating it.

So it's more like contextual roles or functions that are played by different actors across different scales rather than, again, with a marker, oh, this is a predator and this is a prey.

And so that's why that hierarchical sort of ladder of being or food ladder morphed into the chain, into a food network, because we understand that different resources are being passed around in really complex ways.

So to me, the take home for Complexity Weekend as a complex system is encouraging that in different contexts, different teams, we're going to be mentoring and we're going to be

getting mentored.

And everyone who's taking a beginner's mind and is listening and hearing where they can learn, they're going to be learning.

And we're also going to find opportunities even for those who might not have thought of themselves as teachers to also be teaching us about their perspective.

And the second piece is about the ANT collaboration, ANT participation, of course, participants.

And what it comes down to there is the 120 million years of selection

To be honest, ruthlessly culling colonies where the rules that the individual ants follow were not adaptive and environments change and something could work for 50 million years and then the game changes and it doesn't.

But the species we see today represent the elaboration and the diversification of successful strategies.

so how can we make sure that the teams that we end up cohering on are healthy and that we're not just like getting fixed into early getting strapped into the car with someone who we don't know and i think part of the answer or at least part of the process there is going to be healthy forming and unforming at multiple levels so like when we do the one-on-ones and there's going to be a one-on-one session in just about 20 minutes

there's temporal structure.

So you form and you have the privacy and the structure, and then there's an unforming that's structured.

So it's not like you have to wonder whether the other person wants, if you wanna keep talking, send each other a key based message and you're connected.

And now who knows where that can go, but there's a healthy way to disengage because it's not just that the first two interacting ants or the first two bumping fish are instantly gonna get locked in.

And so that just reflects how, if we want selection to shape success,

of the individual, the relationship, the team, the community, it has to happen gradually and it has to include everybody who you want on board.

If you want it to be a co-evolution between the researcher and the hospital and the patients,

All of them need to be aligned.

Like you said, if they're at odds with each other, it's going to be a mess or ineffective or worse.

But how could you get them aligned, maybe even aligning them on ideas, tools, and people, and then have them working together in a way that feels fluid, just like the fish moving through water.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I'd love to talk about the different, because there's seven parameters in my model, but we don't have time.

But this idea of purpose, we can talk about that for now.

And anyone who's interested in my paper, I'll be happy to send a link to read it or to discuss other aspects of the model.

I just want to give a plug for one of my projects now, which is the Legend of Gather project.

Looking at my model around how to build and manage healthy human digital ecosystems, I was thinking, what would be a good practical focus?

So I was thinking, well, me coming into the Complexity Weekend, like many of you, we are in a sense being onboarded digitally.

So I was thinking, what are some of the ways we could take my model and find an effective way to digitally onboard people into a system, whether that would be a university or work or into an event like ours?

So that legend of Gather, it's still very broad right now, but we're going to look at

maybe a few projects around understanding how to use my model in part, but it's all about effective digital onboarding.

How do you bring people in?

that the system the human digital ecosystem has unity so what that means is that people want to participate as opposed to exits how do you get people in and keep them subscribed and then health is that everyone is being enabled and empowered so they want to stay so coming back um so legend of gather we have our own key base thread and anyone who's interested in

the team or the topic of the team be happy to join in and we can talk more about that at the event at the event we might have some meetings and i'll be floating around to talk about that so that right now is my practice project at complexity weekend i'm specifically coming back to my session which we're going to be examining purpose i'm now thinking about my purpose within the community so i mean if i start to think about this as an example

Maybe this will help us understand what purpose is.

So I'm thinking when I came into Complexity Weekend, my purpose really was see what's going on.

My professor said, it's interesting.

These people are tech people.

They're also very much free thinking.

They're out of the box.

They're cross disciplinary.

And I thought, wow, I love interesting people and smart people and

So I came in and I came with that purpose.

I just want to look.

And as I started to see things of interest, I realized my new purpose is to look but also to learn.

And basically, I find myself in a few one-on-one chats with people like yourself, people like Blue Knights, Jen Huff, Steven Silitz.

And I started then going to some of the sessions and watching the live streams and

So now I'm starting to learn there's some things of interest here.

So I'm getting purpose of I would like to learn more about this specific thing.

And then there was a discussion around projects and project teams.

So I'm like, well, now my purpose is basically to have something to deliver by tomorrow at 2 p.m.

my time.

Suddenly my purpose is I started having a lot of different purpose.

And suddenly it was like, actually, I have to get off this now and do something.

homework assignment so like the thing is there's a broad purpose then there's values and there's objectives you know so i'm trying to narrow that understanding of how would we look at our elements each of our purpose in a way that it would help inform whether we're going to align or not and when we would have misalignment i know a lot of the work that rj corday does is on teams and team effectiveness and you yourself as an ecologist trying to understand things around communication and

How does effective communication facilitate a working team?

So yeah, if you want to speak to this idea of purpose, I'm happy to listen to anything you have to say.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

And great comments from Jen and Sean writing, maybe shared purpose as a main deliverable for teams during CW, which is probably a different way of thinking than those who might be expecting a hackathon, a sprint to the finish, a pitch.

It's a long journey and we serve through deep time.

So purpose is not something that you just sort of capture and freeze frame.

It's something that you develop with, like you just brought up.

And

just to give one point, because, of course, so much could be said about teams and purpose and online teams.

When you said that

it we we ask ourselves are we fulfilling our purpose or are we what is our purpose if we don't know it's sort of like those two modes of science we talked about earlier you know watching the ants and then should i be watching ants or which colony it's like how do i implement my purpose and then what is it that's the second order question and it makes me think about the team context because we say we learn by doing and we learn by doing together so how do we connect that

to purpose of individuals and of teams.

So just to give like an example situation that I'm sure is gonna come up 500 times.

Let's just say there's a team where three people know about an idea like machine learning and one person doesn't.

Well, if the purpose of our team is just to apply machine learning, it's like, okay, well, I mean, are we gonna drop this person or maybe go figure it out yourself and then we're just gonna do the development.

But when we realize that we include to innovate, when we realize that our purpose as a team is to have participatory projects and also that our purpose is peer mentorship and to learn and to teach from each other, that person, that fourth person is brave.

And they say, what do you mean by machine learning?

And all of a sudden, instead of that being where you

cut the sheep from the flock it's the opportunity to engage somebody because everyone's purpose is to help them learn so then you can have a conversation and i bet that even people who are familiar in machine learning would have new insight if the person is coming from a different approach maybe they bring in a new terminology or a new concept so it's like when we realize that we have purpose as a community and as teams

it allows us space for that person to ask a question way on the sort of bottom-up side.

So this multi-scale purpose that you're talking about, I hope people will see how it allows them the justification or even the imperative to include people in participation, to stick around, to show up for each other, all these things that are just not secondary to online communities.

They're primary.

We need to show up for each other.


SPEAKER_00:
So if I may, I can talk about my personal purpose at this stage.

So I intend to work in the public sector, most likely for the US federal governments.

And I hope to shape public policy such that we can secure the opportunities of digital technology at this stage.

It's all the internet, internet of things.

Just coming up the pipeline is going to be AI and robotics.

At some advanced stage, it'll be more semi-automated and fully automated systems, intelligent machinery.

That's my purpose.

But I come into the Complexity Weekend, I've got a purpose for that weekend.

I've got a purpose in general for the project.

The thing that I've found really, really useful and interesting, and I'd love you to speak to this, is the values of the weekend, because those values help me take my purpose and understand what's appropriate.

One of the parameters of my model, which I'll be happy to speak about anytime, is something called allowance, which allowance is within the micro system of

Complexity Weekend, the human digital ecosystem, but within the microsystem of our event and our community,

allowance would be like what should i and shouldn't i do what can i and can't i do so you guys have some values here and that helps me come in with my purpose understand inform me how do i modify my purpose specifically for the weekend for us now on the live stream for how i interact with someone whether they're an expert or a beginner or maybe someone i'm mentoring i mean i'm just a beginner right so i'm a beginner facilitator so

Would you speak to our values?

Because the first thing that really jumped out to me when I came in

That's how cool the people are here.

I mean, like since the weekend, I've spent countless hours talking to Blue on the phone about all these amazing things.

And I haven't had time so much to read books and watch videos.

And I still want to read The Great Preset, which you and RJ authored.

And I want to watch videos and read books, all this amazing stuff.

But it was like, there's something about the energy of the people here with the wellness exercises.

There's a people-based purpose.

And like I told you, everything in life really comes down to poetry and magic.

We just have our nose in the book.

What's the point, really?

Ultimately, we're trying to optimize and actualize as human beings.

Could you maybe speak to those values and how they guide our human experience at Complexity Weekend?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, a few thoughts on that in our final 10 minutes.

We're taking a journey.

We're taking an adventure alone and together.

And it's almost like if you told someone you visited a forest nearby, you know, I went to Brazil, I went to America, I went to some other place.

And someone says, oh, you know, you haven't visited unless you went to this city.

It's like, okay, you had an awesome trip.

But I had a different journey.

So there's so many papers to read and so many books to read.

Whatever path you take will be special.

And there's a way where we can build each other up with any of the pieces that we've determined that we've read in common or not.

It's just great.

We've been to the same place or not.

Even if we went there, we had different views on it.

So that kind of complexity journey thinking

allows people to determine what purpose is really resonating with them, because it's not like something that's, you know, written on the back of your hand.

It's not something that we're born with.

It's not something that we know, especially in verbal terms.

So how do we come into that purpose?

That's something I hope that we're always all figuring out and how to connect it to the values.

I mean, again, the values as in evolving and a distributedly understood

body of not just knowledge but a body of practice i want to know that too and all i would say to that in the context of cw is that the organizers of an event which are not a special kind of person there it's an event specific role like may 2021 organizer or heartbeat organizer so these roles are open to everybody who wants to organizers are the facilitators for the facilitators

So you know that we send you spreadsheets and reminders and we're there to help you record a video or we're there to scaffold your experience.

And what are the facilitators there for?

They're for facilitating participation.

In other words, they're there to facilitate the purpose because we're not facilitating you learn something you didn't show up for.

But at the same time, when we remain open to the unknown, maybe you get facilitated in a way you didn't expect.

And that's why we encourage peer facilitation, because it's not just the people who are the facilitator role on the website who bring that facilitator energy.

Those are just the people who we can really trust and count on to be there.

But again, that role is open to everybody who wants to participate in that way.

So I just say thinking about complexity as role or rule-based systems, massively interacting, distributed cognition, things that the ant colony knows that the ant doesn't, things that the brain knows that the neuron doesn't.

So there has to be things that we can know and do as a community that we're just not going to understand.


SPEAKER_00:
So I think for me, coming from, because we're, in a sense, most of us are very cross-disciplinary.

So I kind of come from public policy, public sector.

How do we design regulations?

What projects should we push for development and growth?

We aren't scientists, most of us, and we're not academia.

But what's fantastic is that we get to come here and engage and learn how to interact with people like yourself, right?

Who's like very sort of high level ecologist, scientist.

I mean, Daniel, you dissect ant brains for fun on your lunch break.


SPEAKER_01:
Everyone who's ever tried to dissect an ant brain who I've worked with has always been able to do it in their first sitting.

So there's the story about dissecting ant brains and then there's actually looking through the scope.


SPEAKER_00:
So we want to pull these guys from Congress, like suits like me, and say, like, here's Daniel.

Like, you don't know anything about him.

He's dyslexic and brain.

And my guess is within 20 minutes, they would totally understand how the work you do totally benefits them and their work and could change the face of the United States and the world.

So this is kind of my goal, is to bring in new kinds of people to see how to engage with scientists, academia, and people

in our community.

I know one of our values is inclusion, and there's some people in the chat.

And if you want to maybe talk about what's happening in the weeks before we're leading up to the event, because the event isn't just the actual event.

What should the participants know now for this period?

And what can we be doing live with each other before the event?

And of course, no pressure.

Everything I think here is learn at your own pace and go, right?

Enjoy yourself and learn and grow, right?

Would you like to speak to anything before we close?


SPEAKER_01:
Sure.

Thanks for that question in our last few minutes.

And it's really, it's a colony phenotype.

It's really an emergent property.

So I hope that we can all come together.

It's not just a conversation between discipline A and sector B. It's really us coming as individuals, not representing anything bigger than that, but coming together to do more than that and to be more than that.

What can we do in the pre-weekend phase?

Well, there's synchronous things you can do and there's asynchronous.

Asynchronous, anytime you feel like going to Keybase, giving your introduction, leaving an emoji, letting other people know that they've been seen and heard, share a resource, read another resource.

Again, the path you take is going to be very unique to you and you're not going to get to every single resource that's shared.

And then the synchronous opportunities like the one-on-one that we're about to have or a future one are there whenever.

if it's during the weekend we're going to have no dead times there's no default time zone we're going to have facilitated sessions and people just bumping into each other at all times so if it's during the weekend just show up come into the gather link go to your single source of truth and then also asynchronously you know listen to the facilitator videos listen to

what john just had to tell us and think about how that it's not that you're going to download that and make that your software because your life is not their hardware so how about we resonate with what you've shared because it was so fascinating and then use that to hone our own purpose so what a fun time


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you so much.

So anyone who needs to reach me, you can find me outside of our Complexity Weekend microsystem on LinkedIn.

That's John Alexander Sinman.

I think the video will be saved with my name.

And on Keybase, I'm at J-A-L-E-X-C-I-N.

Anyone interested in Legend of Gather, which is about digital onboarding, find me in the Gather space and have a chat.

Drop me a Keybase message.

I'm happy to chat about this.

to make myself available.

I just want to say I'm really grateful that we've developed this digital technology to the point that we can build this human digital ecosystem.

Like there's pockets of it that are just ugly and other pockets of it that are mixed, right?

That we have great experiences, but bittersweet, you know?

But I'll say this, the complexity we can, what you guys have built here in our microsystem, it's just amazing.

I'm so grateful to have been part of it.

And I want to thank

you for um the interview today and all the people who participated by chat and to all the viewers and everyone um i'll catch you in the week before at the event or sometime after in the future thank you very much awesome we look forward to that so we'll end the stream thanks john and see some of you at the one-on-one