SPEAKER_04:
Hello and welcome to Complexity Weekend.

We're so glad that you're here and we're really looking forward to the February 2021 Heartbeat event.

We're about to hear a 25-minute musical composition improvisation by Michael Garfield, one of our awesome facilitators.

Then we will be having a participatory live stream.

hearing from some of our facilitators, co-organizers, and also all the participants by the use of a Jamboard.

So without further ado, here's Michael Garfield for 25 minutes, and we will see you in just a little bit.


SPEAKER_03:
Woo-hoo!


UNKNOWN:
Thank you.

Oh.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Bye.


SPEAKER_04:
Hello and welcome everyone.

Welcome to the February 2021 Complexity Weekend Heartbeat.

This is going to be a really fun live stream and a really fun interactive event.

So just to introduce ourselves before we jump into the organizers introduction, my name is Daniel and I'm a co-organizer for this Heartbeat and I'm here with Stephen.

So maybe Stephen just say hello and introduce yourself and then we can jump into the slides.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, welcome.

Stephen here.

I'm in Toronto.

been connected to the Complexity Weekend since last year.

Really enjoying having a chance to be part of this co-organizing process.

And I work a lot with communities and complexity of multi-scale development.

And so complexity comes in there.

I've also got a background in graphics.

So I've had a chance to play with a few things and try out a few other ways to

bring immersive theater components into an online space so very curious to see how that that goes and uh we'll we'll talk more later but um thanks daniel you carry on cool thanks a lot so thanks everyone who's watching live and we're gonna jump into the organizer introduction


SPEAKER_04:
This 20 minute introduction is gonna have two main parts.

There's gonna be a welcome to Complexity Weekend because it's always some people's first time.

And then we're gonna have the second half be more about the logistics and the specifics of the February event.

So first, let's talk about the Complexity Weekend Community of Practice.

Well, initial conditions and history and development are very important for complex systems.

Here's a little bit about ourselves.

Our first Complexity Weekend was in person in San Francisco in May 2019.

And then for 2020, we did two Complexity Weekends that were all online for obvious reasons.

And now we're looking forward to our next May 2021 Complexity Weekend.

But over the course of these weekends we've done in person and online, as well as the smaller kind of drop in heartbeat events, we've really just had some amazing feedback and opportunities to work on projects together and learn by doing as a group.

These initial conditions are one way to think about Complexity Weekend.

And another way to think about our community is that it's structured by roles and events.

So the roles that exist in our community, the biggest circle is participant.

Everyone is a participant.

And then people step up or step in to events, role-specific events.

assignments so for example like stephen who is an event organizer today so here we are in this purple circle for today but we're still within the participant circle facilitators who will introduce to you shortly these are the participants who are going to be leading interactive sessions and contributing their unique perspectives on complexity

associates and supporters are those who allow our community to remain without any kind of financial barrier to participation at all as well as to offer all kinds of special experiences for our community and then on the bottom here are the two main ways that people can start to get involved start participating

On the left is this monthly heartbeat.

And we do 10 heartbeats a year.

And if you're listening to this live or in replay, you're part of the heartbeat.

You're a participant in the community.

And then we also have these biannual weekend cohorts.

And the cohorts of the weekend are a little bit more drawn out.

There's a lot more of a cohort guided experience, as well as more of a team formation emphasis.

So before we kind of move forward, Stephen, any thoughts on that or what is fun to you about this?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, yeah, I think what's interesting is there's a lot of strong kind of

software development, agile development kind of experience in the team and working in both large scale academic contexts and business context.

So when I sort of came to the big event, you can see there's a really this team formation and just letting people to come together.

But rather than just being about everyone trying to make a prototype straight away, the team itself was kind of the prototype in a way.

It was like, how can we work together?

And what's been interesting is this heartbeat has evolved.

There's sort of been this slower sort of ongoing piece, which is

probably been where I've been able to fit in a bit more, because I do a lot of this more community based team.

So me and Daniel, sort of talks, Daniel works a lot with online teams.

And I work with community based in the sense of like rural South Africa, communities in long term development projects with communities with disability or newcomers or just

so it's been really interesting seeing this what it means to facilitate in these different ways because some of the stuff that i have is maybe even intimate theater or slow theater or immersive theater in some quiet uh

sort of sense breaking forms.

So sort of seeing these things merge a little bit when I play today.

So yeah, that's how it's landed for me anyway.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

And the role based infrastructure is how we keep things organized and allow people to express all their different understandings and views on complexity.

So speaking of multiple perspectives and representation,

Here is a temporal representation of our community.

The Y axis is kind of like the community energy meter.

And we have these two big humps for the weekends.

So here is our last weekend, October, 2020.

And here is our upcoming weekend in May, 2021.

And then there are all the monthly heartbeats in between.

And so we have this renewal process that's on a monthly basis.

And then twice a year, we have these really exciting weekend cohorts.

And then in the background is you and your projects and your teams developing and keeping it action oriented and impact oriented and learning by doing on your complexity journey.

Here we are all listening to this in February 2021 today at the Heartbeat.

And all of these events are community organized.

So if anybody wants to facilitate or co-organize at any future events, even six months in the future, a year in the future, just let us know.

And especially if you want to get involved with the March Heartbeat organization, then we can definitely take that on board right away.

Speaking of the May 2021 cohort, we have just opened up participant registration a few days ago for the May 2021 Complexity Weekend cohort.

So check out complexityweekend.com just to learn a little bit more about that.

And we're really excited because there's gonna be this nice pre-weekend phase starting about March 21st.

So we'll have two months to really familiarize ourselves with each other, the community, the tooling, the idea, and just make sure that we can have really diverse participation.

just to kind of go through some of the registration information from our October weekend.

We'll show you the May information when we get it.

But for October, we had over 35 countries and from 100 participants from over 35 countries.

And already there's probably 20 countries in the first 30 people who registered for May.

And one implication of this is that we always plan our events for global activity.

And so there's never a wrong time because it's always going to be available for somebody and not available for somebody.

So that's why we just put out sessions at all kinds of days and just try to find out where people want to participate because there isn't going to be some sort of perfect time.

We just have to put it out there and see what happens.

Um, as far as what our collective wisdom, our colony cognition, um, can tell us, we see all kinds of skills.

Um, Steven, what, what would you say or think just about, you know, this community or working with so many skills in different time zones areas?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, yeah, I mean, trying to expand it out has been.

um really interesting because um so just adding on to your global reach i've been experimenting with ways gathering these types of platforms can even be used for the communities in uganda and rwanda so there is potential even to

sort of look at how this platform has different ways of engaging.

So I think that's into that inclusivity.

And then I suppose there's a lot of work that would have come from the sort of Santa Fe Institute world of complexity, which is that looking at modeling and understanding what complexity means and all of that and how that comes in.

So that's a really big area.

And it's really interesting because

I think that one thing with that type of work is, yes, it's specialized, but it has real-world applications.

But normally, people who work in that field aren't possible to connect to very easily unless you're also in those areas.

So it's really interesting.

to have that flow and then the other way particularly this time there's this movement now recognizing in the theater of the oppressed world and other sort of more activist world is basically what if you don't know what if things are changing this push to keep helping people can itself be

disruptive or damaging okay so there's there's a desire to be more present more aware but as well as that that being useful for people maybe working with these complex problems there's a bit of both needed you know there's modeling there's a lot so i think this is really great for transdisciplinary uh innovative kind of ways of engagement


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

Speaking about bringing together participants with different backgrounds and experiences, we find that depending on the event and depending on how you scale the word cloud, about one third to sometimes even more of our participants are total complexity beginners.

You're in great company if you're just new to Complexity, if you're from a non-academic background, if you're from wherever you are, it's all good to come together and connect on what we share, which is Complexity.

And there's actually a few things that bring us all together and returning to these at the beginning of all of our events, our purpose and our values help us coordinate.

So what brings us all together is a shared purpose and an interest in complexity science, in applying complexity.

We all want to have impact through co-creating teams and improving our community of practice and also our other communities through feedback, participation, and peer mentorship.

And also our core values and our desire to develop connect us.

are some of our sort of short collective purpose statements.

We have a document that people would be welcome to look at and comment on and edit, but our purpose can be summarized as we learn complexity science by doing, we serve through deep time, and we include to innovate or diversity is key,

And participation is just core to these kinds of transdisciplinary practices.

They're not abstract syntheses to be achieved inside of one person's mind.

They're enacted consequences of a community.

Something on that, Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I'd just be interested, when you mentioned deep time, I mean, that has a whole potential meaning in performance space and cultural engagement and long-term cultural development.

So I'd be interested, you maybe share a bit more about how that emerged out of the journey you've brought into this.


SPEAKER_04:
Oh yeah, nice question.

And there's also deep ecology.

So as a biologist, that was where I had thought of it.

And then also there's just a long-term service and wanting to see systems that are participatory and resilient and stable in long timescales.

So it's like this deep and deep learning, you know, deep neural networks.

It's like,

with just one four letter word you connect across so many areas and then complexity is kind of the bridge that we take to traverse and connect across the people so just in this in the next you know seven minutes we have for the organizers we'll just run through um but this is the kind of question that we want to surface in these streams and then we all want to just participate in what that means

Our values are that Complexity Weekend is itself a complex system as well as the individuals.

So we always have complexity first.

And this means health and balance and integration.

So whatever you need to participate, that's what we're there for.

Education is active.

We learn by doing.

Teamwork makes the dream work as well as relationships.

Participation means that we highlight accessibility and inclusion for all.

So just let us know how we can ever help you or help something that you're seeing.

Respect is key.

And there's so many styles of communication, so many experiences that just giving each other the benefit of the doubt, waiting an extra second for the lag, letting somebody who might not have the opportunity to speak up, allowing them to speak, that's really important.

And then everybody is encouraged to just be themselves, step up and be brave because that's how we organize and enact community events.

As far as our participation guidelines, before we go to the logistics for the last five or so minutes here, we encourage participants to adopt a complexity thinking mindset, whether it's their first time or their thousandth time.

Communication is key.

So focus on the relationship and on the team and speaking without jargon, asking if you've been heard and making sure that you're listening actively.

We encourage people to embrace technology, though knowing its limits.

And it's going to be cool, I think, to talk through the Gather and some of the ways that the technology will facilitate our experience today.

We encourage full participation.

Everyone's going to have a different schedule, a different setting in their life.

So whatever that means to you, that's what it means.

And then we encourage reaching out on the edges and staying involved.

So connect to individuals.

Complexity Weekend, we don't partner with other organizations.

We think of it as individuals partnering and relating with other individuals.

So that's actually the guidelines and the information on that.

Let's go right to this second part and let's just with the heartbeat organizers up here, Steven, maybe let's just try to get through these next couple of slides before we bring Deborah on.

So take it away.


SPEAKER_00:
Excellent.

Thank you.

So, well,

The complexity weekend, this heartbeat is going to be continuing on.

The idea is that we want to have a continuity.

So it's not like we're trying to build and grow the way this works.

And there's a kind of an established understanding of how these things happen.

But we've actually got a bit more of an open, quite a lot more openness this time, where people can sort of connect and integrate and engage with other people.

If you can show the next slide there, Daniel.

Yep.

Here we are with the heartbeat facilitators.

Yeah.

And so we're going to have Alexandra and Deborah who are going to be facilitating.

So Alexandra is going to be facilitating today.

And there's a session on, and it's sort of building on working with complexity and improvised drawing.

And that's been something that's had a chance to evolve and

be sort of developed at different heartbeats before, which is a nice thing about the heartbeat, that you can sort of see this sort of growth.

And then Deborah, who I know from connected through Imagine Action, which is a group of sort of socially engaged theatre artists, primarily coming through the work of Hector Alazabal and the work of using ritual, using theatre of the oppressed,

in different contexts, working also with social presence in theatre, which she will speak to.

But that work about embodied approaches that tend to social complexities and embrace deeper levels of awareness.

And Deborah's got a great deal of experience around emotional intelligence and Vipassana meditation and this type of thing.

So I think it's going to be really interesting.

is pushing the envelope from that field of practice, okay?

So this is, you know, but she's good, okay?

So we're sort of on the cutting edge of that kind of facilitative approach that's gone online, but it's a big question in that field.

Like, you've got hundreds of thousands of theatre artists, particularly participatory theatre artists and immersive theatre artists saying, how am I going to engage people virtually, right?

This is possible partly because of what's happened this last year.


SPEAKER_04:
Very, very cool.

Yep.

And so the event has three different roles.

Everyone's a participant.

Stephen and I are the organizers.

Today, Alexandra and Deborah are going to be the ones who are catalyzing these all interactive sessions in Gather.

And then there are all the participants.

And just to give one question that we asked on the RSVP,

Clearly, it's across the board.

There's no single meter stick or measure or test of complexity, but it just shows that we have a broad range of experiences.

So, Stephen, how about just for two minutes, let's just run through the gather before we get to the schedule, and then we'll bring Debra on in just a couple minutes.

So talk us through just gather really quickly and leaving it for people to explore themselves in the time.


SPEAKER_00:
okay so we're just on this community tech uh gather side here so everyone's sort of come into the space and they've sort of had some immersive experience or when they go in of what it's about but you basically use um your keys to to navigate this uh landscape and these these this room that you can move around and organize yourself in

um has tools to help with that both within the space that you're in but also when you go to another room or another part of the space so that's sometimes the challenges with this type of thing is keeping a track on where you are and where you are in relation to other people so you see at the bottom there

There's a bar and it has your name.

So it's like a round bar with you see a smiley face on the screen.

So that that bar can really help you with the map and the screen share also, which is particularly useful if you want to show something to someone.

And in the poster presentations and there's a status as well, which will if you go away to put your camera to sort of.

sleep because obviously you don't want to be accidentally this this will just carry on otherwise being connected so you can change your status in that way so now if you go to the next slide

which is the co-working space in Gather.

So these co-working, I like to think co-creative spaces maybe we would use in the device theatre world.

So it's a bit of both.

It depends on where we are in the team formation or in like riffing off.

So it goes between a range.

And so the way that the organisers here have designed that, which is quite nice actually to be truthful,

is they've got these tables, they put the shared whiteboard in the middle, which is one of the functions of Gather.

And it's a basic but lightweight way to, you press X, okay, and that's the, X is your friend in this game, right?

So you press your X and it boots things up normally if it's going to be possible.

Sometimes you miss that because it's in smaller text underneath, but you'll see it glow and press X, you'll see something happen.

with other things like when you look at the posters.

And that rug that you see there, basically you can't see it, but that rug has got sort of a selection of squares hidden in there that basically says everyone on those squares can hear and talk to everyone else.

Just like when you get close to someone and gather, you start to be able to see them.

There's different distances or different ways that we sort of have to configure people being able to talk and interact.

So that's something that's quite interesting.

And that came up as we go to the next slide,

um with the space so we're sort of playing with that and for this um session we've got the um slight rearrangement so we've opened up and moved the um the sort of spotlight talks for those of you who've been to previous events and uh created a sort of an open sort of space stage okay which you'll actually see has got the graphic on the floor um

So you can stand on that and we can even move that up later.

We have some flexibility now to play with this in real time.

There's certain things you can actually update in real time without it just being psychedelic.

And so this could be a mixture of like a normal podium or it could be more like Steve Jobs in front of his cohort.

So that's that sort of stage.

the info booth you can see on the top top left gives you some gives you some ways to just get some ways to look at the map and find some other things out and any suggestions what else you'd like in there and as you can see we your your spawn spot is where you arrive

And there's also a live session room, and you'll see that in the middle there.

You just go through.

There's a bar and lounge, which has been slightly updated, and we'll talk about that more.

And there's a cave with a fire, and there's an outdoors.


SPEAKER_04:
So please just enjoy that.

Yes, Stephen, epic work.

Thanks so much for incrementing our atrium space.

just to show the schedule before we bring deborah right on so today on saturday february the 27th at least for where i am um we're in the middle of this live stream we're about to hear from deborah and then we're going to bring on sasha as well and then at

After we finish this live stream, we're just going to pop over to gather.

So that's where the rest of the events are going to be.

And that's where we'll be having a how to gather session with Sasha, which she'll talk about in a little bit.

And then also the participant spotlight talks and the awesome posters.

So this is the program link.

It's in the YouTube chat.

It's in your event calendar.

You also should have gotten an email.

I'm going to bring in Debra.

And then maybe we can even just walk through some other thoughts and questions.

But the program is your single source of truth, and that's where you can see the bar, which is going to be just this awesome, fun experience, as well as the cave.

And then just on a closing note for the organizers here, welcome, Debra.

If you want to support Complexity Weekend or you have any questions, just get in contact.

It's what we're here for.

So with this all being said, Debra, greetings and welcome.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.

How are you, Daniel?

Nice to see you.


SPEAKER_04:
Yes, great to see you.

So this is just a fun couple of minutes, five to ten minutes for us to learn a little bit about where you're coming from with Complexity because it's definitely going to be some experiences and some perspectives that are new to our participants.

So maybe just introduce yourself or what brought you to Complexity or to Complexity Weekend.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

Thank you, Daniel.

Well, who am I?

I work in organizational and social transformational development, talent and leadership.

But at the same time, I'm part of the great and truly talented community called Imagine Action.

That's where I met Stephen, and he was the one that brought me here to the Complexity Weekend.

I don't know why I say yes.

Yes, I'm here because of him.

Also part of the community will be here.

We, I think that will be later.

Ruth also having some works later.

I guess that Claire Thompson might be there watching the live stream.

And also we have Hilaria Hector and a lot of great people in the community.

So we are part of that.

We work with social arts for wellbeing and transformation.

Yes, well,


SPEAKER_00:
uh also stephen and i we are working in some research about maybe stephen you want to give some words about what we are doing about systems and the complexity yeah i suppose in a way it ties into this deep time that we were just talking about earlier and nearly went off with a long deep conversation and then you mentioned that there because i was feeling that going there yeah i mean we there's the question um

of very quickly is how do we work with space and how do we work with our understanding of how we engage with space and the body in space?

And these questions are really, really interesting because it has a profound impact on how we can cross between these different fields and scales, et cetera, which also ties into an area of complex adaptive systems

which we won't go into but it's called um active inference which is how i connected to daniel funny enough which is um itself also what looked like a very outlying kind of um very outlying even if you were in academia suddenly is becoming very center stage in how much it can help us understand the world embodied ways as well as other ways so the possibilities are actually very very cool so that's the sort of work with the infusion space that we're sort of thinking about yeah


SPEAKER_04:
yeah it makes me think about how connecting people on the relationships the ideas and the tools it's kind of what we have access to and so here we are using tools having a connection and also the ideas and then when all three can come together and we're all on the same page with those uh attributes it's really powerful so deborah um

What are you looking forward to or curious with this online setting?

Because it sounds like you have so much experience with these kinds of transformative projects in person.

And how do we take that embodied, healthy approach to online?

Okay, great.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, of course, I'm not an expert in complexity.

It's not my main.

But yes, I do work and I have been working for 12 years with talent and leadership development.

And the

the interactions of people within the system are very complex.

I think they are the most complex thing that will have to deal with the relationships and the quality of the interactions, right?

So what we talk about,

What we really talk about in systems, the thing that we cannot see is the culture of the system.

Yes?

And the culture is the sum of all the subsystems, the individual systems that are every person, right?

And how do we build culture?

With behaviors.

What we do every day, we build a culture.

So

What do you find underneath cultures?

Emotions.

Emotions are the energy to act, you know, just to behave.

So when my expertise or my background are much in emotional intelligence, they're really connected with embodiment because emotions are psychophysiological.

They have an impact on your body, but also on your mind.

So it's not body or mind, it's both.

But we are all the time on our minds thinking a lot about problem and complexity.

But, you know, paying attention to that doesn't make the impact on the problem less, you know.

It's the opposite.

So our proposal with a season tomorrow is to explore the knowledge.

Like I like to say in a very informal way, the mind of our body and all the information that is contained in our body has to change.

So because of that, in a way, just saying in general, you will gain first is to hold on to questions, to be there, you know, training the attention or focusing.

And focusing is the main gate for another skills like concentration, empathy, perception, you know, a lot of things.

So if you really want to deal with complexity in the interactions of the people in the system,

you need to pay attention to get awareness.

And in that way, it's that we use our body to get that, yeah?

From nice patterns, see how you behave with your body and then how you produce that behavior in the real world, because it doesn't have any sense if you practice and then, you know, you cannot bring that knowledge or awareness to the outer world, you know, to deal with complexity.

And sometimes we realize in organizations and when we are dealing with problems and issues in organizations, it's very difficult to be with the complexity, with the unknown, with the conflict, with the difficult conversations that we need to have to solve things in the organizations and also to increase the quality of interactions within the people in the system.

So using the body as a tool, you know, to deal with complexity, it's part of us.

It's being there, recognizing patterns, paying attention, staying there and holding on to the question, to the conflict.

And yeah, I think it's, yeah, it's more or less what I want to say.

I don't want to spoil much because we need to come with the open mind to

to experience and without any previous idea.


SPEAKER_04:
Perfect.

Stephen, we'll go to you.

I just posted the link to the Jamboard and we're going to bring in Sasha.

And so if people who are watching live, they can click in the Jamboard link and then Deborah, feel free to stay on.

We'll just hang out and talk for the next half hour as we work through the Jamboard and then we'll just take it from there.

So feel free to stay on or drop off and then I have some thoughts on what you said.

So Stephen, go for it.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, no, thanks.

Lots of, yeah, I agree very much of what Deborah was saying.

I think it's really interesting, this question about the mind, the body, and in a way, bringing the environment in allows the body to have a bigger role.

So it's really, really interesting.

And of course, with this space, we're trying to bring the body in, but the environment is

not necessarily the room that we're all in.

So this is kind of interesting.

So yeah, partially to Daniel.


SPEAKER_04:
The two things that I wrote down, Deborah, from what you were saying was this relational thinking, which is very natural for some of our embodied colleagues and for performers, but the relational insight and which is really network science, nodes and edges, that's something that scientists are just understanding.

You have to have the scientists in the loop.

And then this yes and.

You said it's not body or mind.

its body and mind and so it's that improv yes and that actually as scientists allows us to move beyond well is it reductionism or holism is it mind or brain and so not to put her on the spot but sasha what would you um introduce yourself and then um while people are joining this jam board introduce yourself and you know any thoughts or anything you're thinking about this morning


SPEAKER_01:
Um, well, I think I joined at the perfect time because all of these, uh, uh, key phrases that you just said, I you're, it's like, you're reading off my slides for my workshop.

Um, but exactly, um, that it's about understanding, um, where you are in your relational map and how we envision, um, the diagrams of our relationships.

and change your edges and your mind will follow or something like that.

Yeah.

And I think it's really fun to be able to do that in an online space for accessibility and more options.

So I'm really excited what Steven has done with the space to play around with some of those new affordances.


SPEAKER_04:
fun.

Thanks, Sasha.

So if you're watching live, we're going to be in the Jamboard and then Steven will go to you, but let's go to slide two on the Jamboard.

What is your intention today?

Everybody can edit.

So you can use this left toolbar, add a sticky note, and then just type, you know, what is my intention?

My intention is to learn.

And then you hit save.

And then that's

gonna put up a little sticky note so we're gonna just be on the stream and talk through kind of our thoughts on these while we're also looking and also this is how we can include people who are asleep right now or might want to re-watch this live stream because the jamboard is going to stay up everyone's going to have access so we're just incrementing a bigger project along together and then we'll just be seeing what everybody puts on there so steven what were you um thinking about


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I was just thinking, it was a great session when you were bringing on those points, because also, because your background, you've got the neuroscience perspective of, so, you know, the world of neuroscience, which is obviously to do with the brain in a big way, is also sort of going on this transportation, actually transformation, we say transportation as well sometimes when it comes to

um participate through your art so it can be interesting whether you get transported or transformed and when that happens so maybe we'll be transformed or transported today i don't know but um we can we got the jam board and um we can um just have a look at what's your intention today and um how will that meet and we maybe invite you as well i don't can we flip in to show a picture of the

affordances of a couple of the spaces during that and should we come back to that later is that how would that work just say maybe let people think about how we can suggest or invite things but it's completely how have a look and just try and explore what might be possible as you're going around because it's a very open space today it's not necessarily as directed because there's not so many particular things scheduled

So that might be something which is interesting.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

Yep.

I just flipped over, but we're going to keep it on the Jamboard because that's what people will have up and be adding stuff to.

Look at this.

This is so fun.

Making connections with complexity scientists, feeling energy, meeting people.

So

And then gather, it's just like a physical space.

It's what we bring to it and how we utilize it.

So then Steven and Deborah's insights into how to make the space something where people do feel like it's almost, it's not an emulation of the body, but it's, you know, it allows us to express our deepest intentions, which is what is special and important would be, no one says, what are your intentions for, you know, I'm not going to mention any other video platform, but just insert video meeting boxes here.

Do people...

connect on energy?

Do they connect with their body?

Do they connect with their mind and body?

Do they have the ability to move back and forth between scientific and humanities type thinking?

So this is really fun.

Look at all these fun connections.

So let's just

keep on moving forward.

So who are we on slide three?

Who are we and how did we discover complexity?

So maybe we heard a little bit of the introduction of Debra.

So maybe if you wanna say something else about how did you learn about complexity or systems approaches and then Sasha.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, how did I learn?

Wow.

I think that I learned by doing and being there and just training the quality of paying attention to the system and the threats of the system and the complexity.

Yeah, but also I have academic training related to the things that I did.

But I think that my biggest experience was by working in different companies and leaders and also projects with NGOs.

And also, you know, for me, a great way of learning is generative dialogues.

Like, for example, with Stephen, we will have sometimes two or three hours in Zoom, like discussing topics around complexity or system view.

Yeah, I think mostly that.

Yeah, and I would like to add something that Sasha said in the beginning about the relational position that you have in the system.

what you are saying about this physical space.

And I think that we really work with this type of embodiment work that we are going to practice tomorrow.

It's like just how you show up and which qualities are you bringing into the system, whether it's online, whether it's physical.

You know, we are all the time bringing a type of qualities of being aware of that.

And it's not about changing or picking a better quality.

It's about just realizing and being aware of what you're bringing into.

And from there, it's the only way that you can take action or make a change.

That's why I feel like adding.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

Thank you.

Sasha, then Stephen, maybe.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, thank you.

I like what you said, Deborah, that it's about learning by doing because there's not enough...

Yeah, metaphors or knowledge to really connect to complexity without participating in it.

There's so many ways to enter it.

And yeah, so many really interesting connections that if

If you're onto it, then you're already part of it.

And so that to me is also very exciting.

I got introduced to complexity, I guess, early on just by studying the brain and thinking about neuroscience and how the brain recovers from injury.

the brain is often used as an example of a complex system.

So it seems kind of like perhaps maybe too obvious that it's complex and

through that i learned more about complexity science and attended the complexity science summer school at santa fe in 2018 and really got to learn more about what it means for other systems and what are the actual tools and applications of studying complex systems but how i think about complexity now is that

it's the emergent behavior of a system with many interacting agents and, um, how they change throughout time to have these, um, complex and dynamic behaviors.

And, uh, I guess in my case, it's neurons, uh, interacting to make the electrical patterns of the brain, um, or it's a group events like this, where we're interacting to have, um, hopefully, uh,

also exciting and electrifying interactions with our community.


SPEAKER_04:
Nice.

So Stephen, to you, and I'll turn everyone to number four.

So Stephen, maybe slide four says, what is something you're curious or wondering about?

I knew that your complexity journey was going to involve something you were curious about.

So let's see what everyone is curious and wondering about and go for it.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, well, I suppose the thing that's been curious as well as we get into this is seeing this mix of complexity and uncertainty.

And I think I've got more uncertain as I've had more participation in the world and with different types of people with different types of perspectives.

So I think this is a really interesting

interesting place in a way because there's also complexity within what happens if I have a bifurcation within some mathematical formulation within some domain.

But then as soon as that moves into another domain and the people in that domain have a voice,

So it's not just like I'm applying it here, I'm applying it there.

And they have an opinion and that opinion needs to be listened to.

Well, then there's uncertainty and there's basically like this interest in merger.

So, and I think that's going to be interesting with Matthias' poster, actually, that's going to be happening.

I spoke to him earlier and he's looking at the modeling questions around COVID-19 and

parametric work.

I'm not going to say it because I'm not totally familiar with how that method works.

It's very interesting and involved work, but it has a lot of implications.

So that's really interesting.

And Yuri is going to present as well around some of his experiences working with trying to understand the mixing.

And I'm not exactly sure which way he's going to take it, but he's trying to bring a lot of work from this more social presence and awareness based stuff

and the work which is a traditionally more activist and I'm gonna sort of fix the system to some extent, both areas are reacting to existential challenges around just recognizing what you don't know.

So I think that's really cool.

So looking forward to that.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

And it's this yes and, you know, science and art and the brain and the body.

And then we hold the space in the middle and then some projects are going to dive onto one side or the other.

But we see like abstract

topics that people are curious about, like collective behaviors, you know, something that's for ants, it's also for neurons for the internet, it's kind of, that's the patterns across system, when we're talking about that level of complexity, that's sort of the abstract.

And then there's this group, or how can we make this project work?

Or how can we make social progress on this frontier?

So it's like the specific

and the general and that's always just what is fun and something i'm always curious about is just what happens when we hold that space make the jam board and allow for people to to actually not just say yeah it's possible i guess to have the biologist and the mathematician and the performer in the same room but

I mean, instead of asking yourself whether it's possible, could we just be in that room?

So that's kind of what's fun.

Let's go to five, speaking of kind of cool complexity ideas.

So people, the streams, you know, a couple, maybe 30 seconds ahead or something.

So we just, people will flip to five and this is asking, what is a cool complexity concept?

How would you like to teach it?

And there's sort of two sides to this.

There's, or a continuum and we'll see.

What are people excited about sharing and teaching?

And then what's something that you're curious about and learning?

So Deborah, I'm curious, like,

when you're doing a workshop, when you're bringing these kinds of perspectives into a setting, how do you open that door for people to like start imagining connecting this way?


SPEAKER_02:
With embodiment particularly?

Sure.

Yes.

Yeah.

Well, yeah, first,

I frame, it's very different when I own a workshop, maybe in a company or at the university or with my practical group that we would have weekly.

Of course I frame it and in that way I bring the theory and the practice.

And it's not theory or practice.

So I really frame what is the outcome that we are willing to have with this practice.

Yes.

And also my approach is always about like making a building, the question, instead of looking for answers, uh, yeah.

So the systemic approach it's, it's really about like placing the right question and not right in the sense of right or wrong, right.

For that system, for that moment, because also, you know, uh, I've been teaching at the university for New Year's now, and, you know, I've seen that they study

case clinics and also workshops and companies with this clinic.

And I said, wow, this is so special because we're studying or we are learning from cases and other companies or people while we have all the information to work on our own cases and problems, right?

So in a way it's that way I bring it's like outcome to take action and to have changes more quickly than in another way.

I don't know if that answers the question.


SPEAKER_04:
It's very interesting.

Cool.

Thanks.

And we're seeing a lot of fun ideas coming up on the Jamboard.

So how can we bring the benefits of complexity science to the general public and especially children?

So education across ages and across communities, something that a lot of people are interested in.

How can we apply complex systems ideas about decentralization and self-organization to theories of governance?

Also really interesting question.

Sasha or Steven, what's like one on here that you see as interesting or what's one that you would add?

And I can type it for you.


SPEAKER_01:
I think related to bringing complexity to children is.

Yeah, I think complexity is a bit of a daunting word, but everyone, no matter what field they come from, I think have a link to complexity science and

just understanding that things are connected in new and

unpredictable ways.

And so what I'm curious about is how to get more people involved and using the language of complexity science and kind of the metaphors that we have come up with and have access to as teaching tools to deepen their own field of study, but also to make it easier to link out to other fields, because we

can all be part of complexity, uh, science and the community, like just by learning about it.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

Thanks.

Yeah.

Steven want to add anything on that?

Well, yeah.

Um, let's say let's have an ad while we flip to six, because again, I haven't got too much, so I think just go ahead.

This is really another, you, you wrote this slide, so you can explain maybe how you wanted to frame this.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so this one here, this actually relates to what we call the macro infusion space a little bit.

So I was looking at this idea of participatory sense making, how we can do sense making through different modes that kind of

I scrapped that slide because it was still a bit academic and realized well how are we relating complexity science which I suppose with our complex environments was so actually in some ways is what we live in and so we've got I actually got some of these from the RSPVPs that we got in so but then arranged them from the left which is more around the personal spaces

and then mixing into community groups and and then over into these kind of bodies of knowledge so um so i thought it'd be really interesting to think about well how can complexity basically when we say complexity we sort of mean complexity science and the whole field of using complexity in its various forms um how could that help us do more of certain things in relation to gardening and farming maybe which is different scales of

engaging with with land public performances um which could be you know personal presentations at a wedding to um theater performances community groups where you've got this mixing and blending and then you've got the kind of the middle area which is the kind of might be the message passing type work that we think of where we're trying to move between what the community wants and and

what organisations give, so sort of in there.

And as we move to the right, we've got these kind of larger social systems, because when we talk of social systems, it's really what academia and social sciences is calling the social systems, which is basically us from where they're sitting, if that makes sense.

So the challenge is how to do, is in a way bringing in the middle area, this work with organisations.

You see a lot of the interesting work around complexity in the body,

funny enough, has come out through work in organisations.

And that's now moving up into academia in other areas than ones which would have done dance or something.

And then as you keep going, you've got these broader social systems that the domains of universities might look at.

And how does that

lobbying and that community who ultimately are the ones that liaise between the universities as they shape our political landscape you know so you really see well okay what what do you see here i think people are sort of seeing themes maybe what complexity can help us do more of in these areas

or help us understand better what can it make us do less of.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, it's interesting because sometimes people just want, is it going to go up or is it going to go down?

The GDP or the blood pressure or this rate of this event.

There's often a lot of will and resources and attention on making systems, but look at these things, unintended consequences, unforced errors, cascading failures, fewer unjust hierarchies.

So it's like a recognition that when we don't take a systems perspective,

Sometimes we don't even help the people who we're trying to help or we don't include a community in the design.

So we missed that bifurcation point or we take the wrong road on a bifurcation network.

So it's like that's in a way how we connect the theory with the practice is not just in the academia saying, yeah, we could connect theory and practice if we were to go outside.

It's actually like.

here's a team that has theory and practice.

It's within the brain, within the brain and the body and within the team, within the community.

And then maybe we could help move the needle the right direction on a couple of these issues.

Let's go to seven and we'll do about 10 more minutes of jam boarding.

On seven, we're asking,

what kind of participant behaviors and norms again everyone's a participant even the event organizers just a role what kind of participant behaviors and norms can help us make complexity weekend an amazing space so it's kind of like here we asked more and less and here is saying not just um in the abstract

what is the more and less that we're actually going to wanna see?

So it's taking that systems phrasing of dynamic complex system, there's gonna be still a blood pressure, there's still gonna be a GDP, so how are we gonna move it in the right direction?

And then,

how do we take that to our specific community and the spaces that we have control over most directly?

So I think that's kind of why we include this slide.

And then also over the months and over the years, we've seen just this is how we grow our,

document that maybe I'll put up in a second, but the Living the Values document, which is a lot of incremental additions that help us co-create our kind of values and our culture as well.

So maybe to ask about culture, Debra, you said like underneath culture, there's this substrate.

How do we, or what kind of activities, or how do we think about that?

Or how do we engage with that without getting lost or without just

who knows how many other ways it can go.

But how do we engage with that respectfully?


SPEAKER_02:
With the culture.


SPEAKER_04:
With the substrate, especially when we're connecting across differences.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

Well, the culture is made by the behaviors of people.

And also with Sasha, we were having a conversation before getting in this room about like the...

How we build systems around people that are like us, you know, because it's easier to live without people, but you know, when you're an organization or community, you might have people that is not like you and that's okay.

Yes.

So you have an individual level.

I would like to see, or I would like to, to increase the self-awareness, the self-knowledge.

Yeah.

uh and that in a system level it will impact on you know um group awareness or system awareness and change based on that on the awareness and also it will i will like to build qualities of kindness you know and empathy but it's really about you know also cultivating the individual ones first you know in order to get that

That's the approach of the emotional intelligence strategy also is about


SPEAKER_04:
Cool, yeah, we'll look at all these awesome answers on here.

So on things we wanna see, we have respectful speech behavior, sharing our experiences, mutual understanding, peer coaching or peer mentorship, peer facilitation, everyone's a facilitator, everyone's an organizer in a way.

And then the things we wanna avoid.

So jargon that's gonna be disciplinary or maybe not everyone has the same first language.

solving conflict with censorship, diversity creates systemic resilience, really interesting and shows again, that's how a behavior that we have in our control with conflict resolution is related to questions about cybernetics and complexity.

not letting other people speak especially with lag yeah sometimes on video chat there's a pause and then that makes the conversation structured according to whose culture or behavior will jump in first after a lag so when we want to make space for hearing for everybody and listening you can just wait and just chill an extra second that really helps premature convergence on targets and goals when the situation is actively developing evolving from deeper scales then we can take a perspective on

Looks like you wrote that one, Steven.

So what makes you think about that or how do we avoid that?

Because it's an interesting idea.

How do we avoid that?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Well, it's an interesting one because

we both can't avoid it, but need to avoid it.

So at times we have to sort of take the best stab at where we're at.

But I suppose what I'm really interested in is sometimes I've been really thinking about how we take perspectives on things, but that means basically a perspective is looking at something.

And even we know from active inference work is we actually sense and feel the world.

that we see more than we take a photo of it but there's a lot of stuff going on which um isn't something that you can see in the perspective sense and look down on it it's um and actually this is why I so called in this environment because apart from Cynthia Kurtz who I do work with connecting with biologists has not been something that I've really had

an intersection very often, right?

And the biology I'm seeing is really embracing the idea that, well, things are living, but not just saying it, but like, they really are living.

And there's all sorts of stuff going on there at different scales, that's beyond our awareness.

So I think that, you know, so when we do development work, a big challenge is what's going on in these communities?

is often just assumed.

And how can we just be mindful to listen to what's happening and not label early?

Because once you've labeled,

And you kind of don't do that anymore.

It's kind of part of the label.

So that's it.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

Thanks for sharing that.

So just in light of this just being a total tip of the iceberg, having some fun conversation.

I'm just going to show this slide.

We usually take the time on slide eight to ask giving and looking for community support.

So feel free to put this up.

Use it asynchronously, but we're not going to dwell.

And similarly, nine, are you looking for team members?

Again, if we had a little more time, it's great to delve into this and really hook people up, but we're not going to jump in.

We're going to spend the last minutes

on this slide 10 which is how can complexity have impact in real world systems because other than that we're just going to be meeting and gather so we're going to look forward to the event totally being in gather and being connecting on the edges but let's just spend the last you know five minutes of our conversation here so thanks you know stephen for being co-organizer this month and thanks deborah and sasha for being facilitators and then we're going to be in the event

But before we jump in, let's just spend a couple of minutes on this really important question to connect complexity to real world systems.

So, Deborah, you're you're smiling.

So what does that make you think or want to add?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, I would say that the system is actually complex, so you don't need to bring into it's already there.

So it is just your sense to go through.

It's just explore, you know, discover.

around the complexity because it's there it's it's complexity it's not something outside the system it's already there so that's it for me but again i'm not exploring complexity


SPEAKER_04:
It reminds me of the story with the fish and the water, which Denise Easton and Barb and Alistair kind of brought to the table last Complexity Weekend.

The story being that the fish asks what is water because it hasn't considered its ecosystem.

And so that was sort of an invitation for all of us to be thinking about our context and then the parts that we can't list.

If you exhaustively list your context, the parts that you don't list

are the ones that you are unaware that you're totally within.

Those are the assumptions and the priors that really are the substrate that you mentioned, Deborah.

And then you're just saying, you know, for you, it's like it's your water.

You're thinking about complexity, you're living and you're working in that way.

So it's like, yeah, how does it have impact?

It's like impact is something from the outside that has to touch.

It's a non sequitur, but it's a bridge.

And that's what makes it fun.

Stephen, what do you think about that?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, actually, this is a really cool bridging point because I think...

this speaks to the both ways in a way, because that we're sort of immersed and swimming in it piece is actually quite radical in some ways from some sectors, but at the same time, from that we're swimming in it, to know that complexity science actually can probe and get some amazing dynamical system patterns, like some of the insights now that are coming out of the

And well, actually, in this group, I've learned about this agent-based modeling, they call it.

And now they're bringing these dynamical systems into play and this more kind of flowing type of idea of systems, which we don't normally know about so well.

You start to see that it can be really helpful

to have um to see that the complexity science stuff is starting to become relating to that so that's kind of cool and then the complexity science and well science in general is quite to know like what deborah was saying there the the idea and i think that's also illustrated by the improv drawing work and that

That same idea of things emerging, what does it mean to have things emerging?

Well, it's not just emerging as things, like you're saying, it is actually a process in itself, which is very David Bohm, which was normally very out there, but now everyone's loving David, so it's getting everywhere.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, also, I would add that the first challenge with complexity is ourselves, the complexity within us.

from there you know then we are just deep relation being in relation with a lot of people with their own complexities and we create a system the sum of our our complexities so you know in that way yeah that's awesome thank you um sasha yeah i really like what you said deborah that um you know we could be our own uh biggest uh


SPEAKER_01:
challenge to entering complexity and that world of thinking because um we have to have faith that um we know enough to enter the conversation and that other people want to know more about where you're coming from and i really hope that this is the kind of environment that we're able to build where um people just can enter with an openness um to different experiences and um

different outcomes and so I think that's something you've brought up also that not to erase our differences and kind of focus only on the things that we have in common because

like with all the other systems that Stephen had listed on the previous slide, there's a lot of different approaches to each of these fields and people come in with different goals.

And I think it's very exciting to be able to talk about it and work through it in the direction that we couldn't possibly have planned on.

So I find that very exciting.


SPEAKER_04:
Fun.

Thank you, Sasha.

So just to sort of capture this little

display we have here we have everything from how people relate with themselves and their time to the kinds of everyday work scenarios that we all find ourselves in related to goals related to money and people's time and then bridging fields from humans and computers to humans and horses interacting so across species and across types of systems so really fun and of course it will be asynchronous

So just to close out this stream, here's some tips for online collaboration from Monica Kang, who's one of our awesome facilitators.

She'll be back for upcoming Complexity Weekend.

And go to the website if you're curious in registering.

It's a sliding scale.

It is zero...

money required.

And there's a lot more information on the website.

We're about to meet in just a couple minutes and gather for Sasha to walk us through gather so that we're all on the same page with moving and muting and all this other stuff.

So Steven, thanks again for your service as co organizer, Deborah and Sasha for facilitation.

And we will see you all next time and or in gather.

So bye.


UNKNOWN:
Bye.