SPEAKER_00:
Hello, everybody.

It's the September 2021 Complexity Weekend Heartbeat.

Thanks so much for joining.

We're about to have a little bit of some music from one of our facilitators, Michael Garfield, aka Future Fossils.

So enjoy the next 25 minutes of music here.

And then we will join you for an interactive live stream with the organizer presentation and then a jam board that we'll all work on together.

All right, so enjoy the music and see you in about 25 minutes.


SPEAKER_04:
Help me!


UNKNOWN:
Thank you.

Music Music

Thank you.

Bye.

Bye.

So,

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you for watching.


SPEAKER_00:
Hey, hello everybody.

Thanks for tuning in and welcome to the September 2021 Complexity Weekend Heartbeat.

I'm just going to get the slides up on the screen and I'll unmute on gather so that everyone else can hear me, but it's good on the stream.

So I'm just going to get the layout right, but we can each just say hi.

So hi, I'm Daniel and I'm in California and I'll pass to Shirley first.


SPEAKER_03:
Hi, I'm Shirley in Seattle, Washington.

Hi, everyone.


SPEAKER_02:
I'm Janne.

I'm here in Tampere in Suomi.

You might know it as Finland, so hi.


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

Well, fun organizing with you both this month.

And I have the slides up.

We're doing a little experiment this time with live streaming directly from the Gather space that the rest of the event is going to be in.

And so we are going to go through some organizer introduction slides.

And if you're watching live, feel free to write any questions or comments in the live chat in YouTube.

Otherwise, if you're watching this in replay, that's one of the reasons why we have these organizer introduction slides.

So welcome to the September 2021 Complexity Weekend.

In this organizer intro, we're going to first just give some background on Complexity Weekend generally, and then also talk about the specifics of this heartbeat.

And then we'll talk about the program for this weekend and some of the cool events we'll be doing.

So welcome to Complexity Weekend, our community of practice, whether this is your first event or not your first event, totally welcome here.

first complexity weekend was in person in san francisco i'm going to just again do a little live re-cropping but it was in san francisco and there's a picture from us at seventh and market and in the beginning of 2021 as we were starting to plan for the next iteration of complexity weekend we had to go online and that was really

a great opportunity to connect with global complexity community.

Since then, we've had every six months an online cohort-based weekend, which has developed and iterated over the years.

And now we're ramping up for our next one, which we'll talk more about soon.

Any thoughts on this, either of you two?


SPEAKER_02:
No, not yet, but maybe we can just continue here.


SPEAKER_00:
That's a little bit of the specifics of history, but one way to look at it as this kind of graph that we have here

is on the Y axis is kind of like the energy of you or of the community.

And we have this oscillating rhythm with smaller heartbeat events.

So that's what you're watching live or in replay now.

And then we have these larger weekend events.

That's why it's Complexity Weekend.

So the heartbeats are really fun, but they're sort of checkpoints in between the larger weekend events.

And there's the green line, which is the rhythm of the community.

Whether or not you can make it, you know that we'll be having a heartbeat every month and a weekend every six months.

But then also there's you and your team.

And there's a lot of different ways to be on a team and a lot of things that they do.

But the idea is there's sort of this parallel journey while we're having a certain community rhythm, that there's also a rhythm happening at the individual level in your relationships and your teams.

also just as per the bottom of this slide these are totally participant organized events so if you want to organize any future events just email complexityweekend gmail.com or get in touch with us and you can say i'm busy for the next two months but i'll be available in this month of 2022 to organize that's totally fine any thing to add on this


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I really like this graphic actually.

I like that there is like a pulse going through throughout the whole year and it's ongoing.

And then we have these peaks during our heartbeats and the larger hackathon events that we have biannually.

So I think this is a great representation of our community and the way we keep the energy going.

And so now from this month, as you were saying, so we have this nice bright yellow arrow from where we are today and right now, and we can kind of take off from here.

So, yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, nice.

You added a rocket ship on six.


SPEAKER_02:
What's happening on this slide?

Let's have a space shuttle because that's the only exit strategy we've got right now.

So...


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

To the moon.

But here we zoomed in.


SPEAKER_02:
At least.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

We zoomed in a bit on the next few months.

Right now it's the September heartbeat, but registration is now open for the November 12th to 14th weekend.

So if you go to complexityweekend.com, you'll see the info on registration.

That's something that hopefully everybody will sign up for.

There's just lots of ways to participate in it and it'll be fun.

So join it.

Any other thoughts or do you want to go for seven?


SPEAKER_02:
Just sign up.

Sign up for the November big weekend that we've got coming up.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, let's go to seven.

Yana, do you want to give a first?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I can go on with this.

So this is a kind of overall view of the way Complexity Weekend is set up.

We have these monthly heartbeats.

which we have like right now and that's keeping us going and it's an entry point so there is a few entry points with the Complexity Weekend global community and this is one of them that you can sign up every month and join us on these weekends.

We also have the Keybase where we just kind of keep in touch with each other and share ideas and links and keep the conversation going.

And then twice a year we have these bigger events like the one coming up in November.

And the people kind of who are

Running the events, there are associates and supporters, event facilitators, which could be anyone who's watching today or is interested in getting involved, and the same with event organizers.

So that's us for this heartbeat.

And there's teams and they're sort of out on the edge.

So maybe not everyone in your team is participating in the weekends, but you could be like the touch point for your team involved in the Complexity Weekend.

So we have some people on the periphery and there's different ways to participate as much time as you have and resources.

So, yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
think that's that's kind of it unless someone else has something to add thanks for the explanation i would just add that participant is the biggest circle and facilitators and organizers are like event specific roles that are embodied for one event and so we're the organizers for this event and

We can also have the hat of a facilitator, but those are always like under the umbrella of participation.

And then that was kind of cool about how the team, it's not like everybody has to be involved in Complexity Weekend to be part of a team.

Maybe people just have links and that's how the connectedness sort of spreads.

Shirley, want to add anything or we'll continue?


SPEAKER_03:
No, I've been kind of quiet because I have like a multiverse in front of me.

where I'm looking at us and gather our little avatars.

I'm seeing you guys on the screen.

And then I'm looking on my phone at YouTube and seeing us a little bit all of the above.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.


SPEAKER_02:
Got a nice command center happening there.


SPEAKER_00:
That's right.

Shirley.

Yeah, we're on slide eight.

So Shirley, um, what is on this slide?


SPEAKER_03:
Um, will it advance?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

YouTube is going to be a few seconds lag, but it's on the right slide.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, I actually Oh, here we go.

Okay, so I really like this.

So we did a word cloud.

And we took the five words in any language that participants wrote up in their registration.

that express or describe complexity to each individual.

So this is what we see here is a lot of wonderful words.

Some of them are larger, obviously, because they have been... Oh, it's interesting.

Actually, there's some repeats there.

But this gives us a little visualization of some of the thoughts


SPEAKER_00:
about complexity um the people have expressed or participating today or this weekend it it reminds me so much there's just a million words where each person was the only person who shared it as well as a few words that are larger like feedback emergent and emergence and uh that represents some of the core concepts of complexity that do link us to the past and often are kind of

shared vocabulary for the complexity community.

And then one fun quirk of the layout, there's chaos on both sides with a capital C and a lowercase C. So it's like, even within the same term, there's going to be different ways that people approach it.

So chaos as well as of course other terms.

So it's like, there's multiple levels at which people have their own perspective on complexity, but it can make something that's coherent together.

Okay, I advanced to nine.

So this is about the global participation, Shirley.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.

It takes, it takes a few seconds for me to see what that is.

Well,

I'm still not seeing it.

Hold on.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, here we go.


SPEAKER_03:
Oh, okay.

Yeah, sorry.

So, yes, this is a diagram of the May Complexity Weekend event where we had a couple of hundred people participate from all over the world.

And there's just a nice little graph of the different countries represented by the participants and facilitators as well.

So, 50.

over 50 countries represented, and we're always looking for more participation, more diversity.

So if people want to reach out, especially in those areas that are narrow, bands, on this graph, it would be wonderful.

And yes, as someone has already said, Jana mentioned the registration for November weekend is now open as well.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, it's a good time to do it.

And so that's one of the important axes or measures or types of diversities in the community.

And then advancing to 10 and just describing it while Shirley's YouTube catches up.

Here is information from this September heartbeat, where we asked, what describes your level of familiarity with complexity or complexity science?

This could be about learning or applying.

And we see this distribution here.

So what does this speak to you, Shirley?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I think it's interesting because I am not sure, but I feel like we haven't had the two hump, so to speak, graph.

I don't know.

Maybe Daniel, you can correct me.

But it is interesting that there are these...

You know, a lot of participants are self-assessing themselves as being kind of beginners, right?

And this is actually for the heartbeat this weekend, of course.

And then we have quite a few people distributed, you know, six and above, I guess you could say.

And a small number of people kind of right there in the middle, so...


SPEAKER_00:
Interesting distribution.

Agreed.

We can definitely look back maybe and compare across cohorts and across events.

But just know that if you're new to complexity, whatever that means to you, we totally understand and keep that in mind, designed for everybody.

And there's many others who are also just starting to learn and explore complexity.

So wherever people are coming from, that's the right spot.

Well, what brings us together?

Do you want me to read it, Shirley?

Okay, so just to read it, and then Shirley can give a thought.

We have a shared purpose and interest in complexity science.

We have a desire to have impact on co-creative teams and to improve our community of practice through feedback, participation, and peer mentorship.

And we share core values and the desire to develop a community.


SPEAKER_03:
Yes, definitely.

These are common attributes of people who are here.

They come in and out, you know, and we welcome participation as people wish, when they wish, how they wish, excuse me, as well.

So these are some core values that bring us together.

And then we bring so much of ourselves, our uniqueness and other attributes to the table.

Into the mix, so to speak.


SPEAKER_00:
Do you want to add anything there?


SPEAKER_02:
I wanted to just quickly also say about the

slide before um the fact that no one claims that they know everything about complexity i really like that about our community so that we're all kind of learning to be uncomfortably comfortable with not knowing um so i think that's one of the things i really like about what we do here and the conversations we have and we're all coming from a space of ambiguity and uncertainty


SPEAKER_00:
good point.

Um, reading even a little bit about any of those keywords, you'd, you'd see that there's hundreds of years of reading on one of those key terms and you wouldn't have even scratched the surface of how to apply and how to teach and communicate.

So there's just a lot to learn.


SPEAKER_03:
I'll just, I'll just add that.

I think that's one of the key reasons why I'm here.

And even before I discovered this community was this feeling of, um,

uncertainty and, you know, kind of, well, okay, yes, anxiety at times, I think, kind of an unsettled feeling and trying to seek some settled feelings, some groundedness.

But I found that actually accepting the uncertainty and rolling with it has been really liberating for me.

And that's like a real epiphany for me because

A few years ago, I was just like, oh my God.


SPEAKER_00:
If we had to wait until we understood fractals or chaos or feedback, if we had to wait until we fully understood, we'd be waiting a long time.

Our collective purpose, I'll read them and then Shirley can give a thought.

So we learn complexity science by doing.

We serve through deep time and we include to innovate.

Diversity is key.


SPEAKER_03:
Yes, these are a lot of great, well, I mean, I like that this document is also, because it lives in a document as well, that it's available for people to examine and also to comment on.

So I'm just saying that because I just had somebody,

A colleague, a friend in Australia messaged me and said, I was looking at the purpose document and I was like, I saw you made a lot of comments, so.


SPEAKER_00:
Fun.

Agreed.

It's really powerful to see how it can change.

And each organizer's group, we template over the previous event of that type, either the weekend or the heartbeat.

And then we modify.

Sometimes the situations change and people have different insights.

So we just keep on incrementing and modifying.

Okay.

Our core values are,

then any one can give a thought so complexity weekend is itself a complex system education is active we learn complexity science by doing teamwork makes the dream work participation means accessibility and inclusion for all respect is key step up and be brave either if you want to add something on one of them


SPEAKER_02:
I think I agree with all of this.

There is a space for anyone or anybody to participate.

Yeah, so that's why I'm here.

I feel the membrane, if we could call it that, of the community allows a lot of pass-through.

Anyone can kind of come and go and there's space for anyone to do that.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

That reminds me of like a strange attractor where even if it's a tiny bit different of a trajectory, sometimes it orbits really closely, you know, three times and then leaves or 55 times then leaves or just passes right through as if it's unaffected.

So what is the area or the domain that helps us talk about that?

It's complexity.

And...

So that's like one way that we can use the ideas of complexity to also help us understand the dynamics and how to organize, which is that first core value.

And that's the fun kind of infinite game aspect of the community because there isn't going to be a final stance on complexity.

Last piece here are participation guidelines.

So we encourage individuals to adopt a complexity thinking mindset that communication is key relationships and teams.

So the one-on-one aspect of relationships, as well as the sort of individual to group aspect with teams and teams of teams embrace technology, but know its limits, which includes using good audio and visual etiquette,

pausing a second, someone might have lag or making sure that everybody is able to speak in a group conversation.

We welcome full participation and appreciate diverse abilities.

So whatever your time availability or whatever you need to make it work for you, that's going to be fine.

And then reach out on the edges and stay involved.

Anything to add on any of these?


SPEAKER_02:
I like that last one like reach out on the edges and perhaps also reaching out to the edges so if we're sort of more in the center it's sort of our responsibility I guess to to reach out to those further out and just see if they want to kind of be more involved and leave it up to them to decide

how much involvement suits their schedules and their availability.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I was going to say the same thing.

I really like that because I feel like, you know, I've often been on the edges of different communities or situations and that reach out can be really helpful, a helpful tool.

And even a small gesture, actually, can be very meaningful.


SPEAKER_00:
in the 30 seconds to help complexity weekend or what can i do if you're ever wondering or have a free 30 seconds reaching out to somebody who you've met in the community and just asking if you can see them again it doesn't have to be in the context of one of our events or bringing somebody who's on the periphery of complexity there's so many areas and practices that

are absolutely at home here that might not um immediately see what their role is in complexity but it's actually us reaching out to them that we make that happen so there's no one else who's going to make it happen if you see the opportunity to reach out to somebody that's like the cue to do it let's talk about this heartbeat specifically and then we'll go to the jam board

This was a tripartite organizational effort with myself, Shirley, and Jana.

So thanks to you both.

This was a fun month.

We had the program kind of sketched out early.

And so it was a chill time organizing.

Again, if anybody else wants to organize a future heartbeat, that's something you could just go to one and say, this was fun.

And I also see ways that I could contribute or I want to learn more about this.

So then you'll be welcome as a organizer.

You're not going to have...

do or die obligations.

It's all opt in and you'll be able to allocate yourself to tasks that are exciting and work with your schedule.

So it's really a good way to be involved.

And then also organizing a heartbeat is how you can then start to think about organizing a weekend or getting involved in other roles.

So cool.

Thanks, Shirley and Jana.

Anything else about the organizer team?


SPEAKER_02:
I think it's been the first time.

Oh, sorry, Shirley.

Would you like to go ahead?

No, you go ahead, please.

Thank you.

Yeah, it's the first time I've been participating as an organizer.

So I've sort of been a little bit held back because I wasn't sure like how much involvement I could really do and how much I could participate.

So I kind of just tried to jump in when I felt I could actually contribute something.

But I really appreciate

Shirley for kind of nudging me a few times and Daniel too, for, you know, saying, do you want to try this and do this?

Okay.

I can, I can give this a go.

So yeah.

Thank you to you both for keeping me in the loop and yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

I was, I was just going to say that I've organized, this is my second heartbeat and I also helped to organize May complexity weekend.

And I do really appreciate the,

Well, that there's scaffolding there for us as co-organizers.

That Daniel and Sean as well and others have really put... It's easy in that sense of, you know, you're not like standing in some uncharted territory.

At the same time, if you want to bring something new to the table...

change something uh experiment so right before this we said hey let's do it and gather and we were you know kind of quickly trying to figure out how to do that and we just decided to do it you know so yeah that's that's spontaneous as well


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, it's fun.

And so we have kind of a canvas and a structure that we modify.

So there's some stuff to do, tweak, change the words from the previous month to next month, but there's also a big opening to do something different.

The facilitators for this weekend are Shirley, Pietro, and Jana.

So thanks to the facilitators and maybe we'll return to what the facilitators will be bringing and doing when we talk about the program.

Here, we usually just have this slide up of the Gather affordances and options, but I'm going to make the Gather the full screen because we're doing it in Gather.

Yana, do you want to maybe talk through a few of the options in Gather?

Then while you're doing it, I'll just demonstrate it on my screen.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, great.

We're here in Gather Town.

Actually, this is where we're having our livestream for the first time.

So when you get into Gather, you'll be asked to pick your avatar, and there'll be a bunch of selections for that.

And once you sort of have sorted that out, I don't remember what the buttons were, but there'll be something like OK, and then you move on into Gather Town space.

If for some reason your audio is not working, click on your name.

You'll see in the bottom there next to your avatar, you click on that and there'll be a bunch of settings including audio and so forth.

And if you want to change your avatar for whatever reason you have or no reason at all, you just want to change it, so you can click on your little avatar there that's next to your name and make those setting changes.

If you need to change, if you want to look at the map and screen share and status settings, that's right there in the same, in that same menu in the bottom of the screen.

On the left-hand side of the screen, there's also a menu.

As you can see, there are settings.

And there's a hammer that's for build.

I don't think we've given you permission to add things.

There might be.

I think Daniel and Shirley will know better.

There's the calendar.

You won't probably be needing that.

There is the chat, and that's usually where you can send messages to each other and links to documents and so forth.

Can you still hear me?

Did something happen to my audio?

Yep.

Okay.

And if you want to see who's there, the people, you can click on that.

That's at the bottom of the menu on the left hand side.

Yeah, and if you can't find someone, click on people and then select the person you want to find and you can click on locate them on the map and then there'll be like a little line that helps you track where they are.

So if you want to find a friend or you want to find someone on Keybase that you want to talk to, you can use that function.

And then the last thing to point out on the bottom right hand corner, there's the mute

button and video on and off you can see and it goes red if I remember correct yeah it goes red with a stroke through the audio or the camera when it's off and that's how you know when your sound's off

We're on.

And that's kind of it for Gather Town.

If you've got questions, you can email the team at complexityweekend at gmail.com or you can hit us up in Keybase.

Let me quickly check which channel.

Tech Support.

So just jump to the Tech Support channel in Keybase and you'll get some help.


SPEAKER_00:
nice fun let's gather and just jump in that's the best way to see how to do it now we have the program up so right now we are in the live stream on the very top of the saturday sessions

We're going to go to a Jamboard for the last half hour of the livestream, and then we will adjourn to Gather, and the link is in the calendar event, or it's the Gather atrium if you've been there before.

We'll have one-on-one sessions, so those are just opportunities for two people to be randomly assorted and have an unstructured conversation.

These are really awesome.

And then we're going to have an emergent worldbuilding session.

And then at 3.30 Pacific, we'll have some spotlight talks if anyone is around.

On Sunday, we're going to hang out and gather before the official start.

And then we're going to start with another one-on-one session.

We'll then have the Be Very Sensible session, the crowdmeter.app session, and then another spotlight talk session.

So Jana and or Shirley, what one of the sessions will you be facilitating or what's one that you can say something about?


SPEAKER_02:
Do you want to go ahead, Jana?

Oh, okay.

So I'm going to be running the session on Be Very Sensible.

And the idea is to discuss sensory processing.

I've been quite interested in sensory information processing as opposed to text-based or graphical information processing.

because most of our devices don't really take much of our sensory input into account except for visual and some touch with our keys.

So I'm kind of wanting to explore that topic and how can complexity fit in because our sensory processing is really, really complicated.

And so, yeah, let's figure that out and throw some ideas around and have some discussion.

I've prepared some content for it, but the main point would be to discuss and kind of open the topic up.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And Shirley?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

So, actually, and Jana also participated on this team, but the next, the Crowdmeter app presentation and demo is...

We were on a team with others at the October Complexity Weekend event.

The Pietro brought the CrowdMeter app to the event and we worked on a team to actually it was the original scope was to build a pilot or prototype app.

But given, you know, whatever the interests of the team and different expertise, we decided to just really talk about initially what could go wrong.

You know, what could go wrong with this?

And that was really cool.

So anyway, Jana and I actually ended up volunteering or working with Pietro after that.

And have been.

And so, gosh, it's almost been a year.

And so it'll be really exciting.

Yeah.

There is a prototype or beta version of the app that Pietro will show us.

And so we will talk about and answer questions.

My role is quite small.

But it's great to have been involved and to continue to be involved.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool, so lots of time this heartbeat for meeting other participants and just hanging out.

In closing here for the organizers, before we jump to the Jamboard, which I posted in the YouTube chat,

the best way to support complexity weekend is especially at this time is really to invite participants to register for the november weekend that's our upcoming big event and that will be just a great time we have about 30 facilitators already and the pre-weekend is going to begin in early october so welcome people in invite your friends if you're already registered because having a personal connection is really what

makes that strange attract your strange and you can look here for more information about supporting us through paypal or contact us for other mechanisms the support is used for gather bandwidth and for honorariums for facilitators not at the heartbeat but for the weekend and now we're going to go to the jamboard so it's in the youtube chat as well as in the program you'll find a link to the jamboard

and we'll be just doing some interactive slides.

So while I crop this screen, we're on the first slide in the Jamboard.

Any overviews that you wanna just add in while I'm recropping a little bit?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I'll just say,

This is meant to be interactive, so please join in.

Feel free to, as we get started on it, add your words and your wisdom and your thoughts and feelings as we go along by adding these post-it notes to the different slides.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, and you can also copy in

images if you'd like okay slide number two what is your intention today

I'll start by maybe adding a post-it.

I think this one is going to be... I'll go with learn.

And then we'll see which other post-its join in.

But any thoughts on this or what is important about asking about intention early on in this process?


SPEAKER_02:
I thought I would, I would add explore.

So it's part of learning is exploring and reaching out.

And I think we do a lot of that here in complexity weekend.


SPEAKER_00:
That makes me think about explore, exploit.

So that's kind of a common phrasing of a trade-off.

And information foraging, looking for information, it's often also framed as explore, exploit, because you can explore a totally different area or you can be exploiting an area that you're already kind of familiar, really getting a fine mapping on it.

And then just like we were talking earlier about being okay with uncertainty.

So where does complexity come into play?

How do we learn about complexity when you could go down so many different branches and avenues?

So how do we learn and explore here?

We have the presence catch up and make new connections.

Fun.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I think it's really important to express to others what your intention or intentions are as a way to surface them within yourself.

So, you know, it kind of comes out and then you share with others so that it becomes something that people can see as a community, a community of intentions, not just individual.

not just the individual level, but as a community, we see the intentions of all present, all those present.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, without communicating about our intentions, other people, it'd be quite lucky if they guessed it correctly from just your little video cell or just a few words that you type into chat.

So communicating about that is important because otherwise we just don't know.

And so sometimes to recognize about what someone else's intentions are, it's how we, on one hand, we're being vulnerable when we share about

what we intend to do.

But on the other hand, there's gonna be someone there listening who hears that intention and maybe they're thinking the same thing or they intend to help or they intend to compliment that view.

Practice mindfulness in relation to interacting with others.

Also really nice.

Okay, cool.

Let's continue on to number three.

Who are you and how did you discover complexity?

Yana want to go first or I'm happy to go.


SPEAKER_02:
Um, yeah, I could say a bit of something.

I came through complexity through systems, system thinking.

I listened to a few books.

I prefer to listen to books and read them.

Um,

And at the beginning, complexity science felt a little alienating at the beginning, and I didn't know how it fit in with systems thinking.

I have a bit more of a systems background.

But little by little, I began to see how they integrate, and there's a lot of overlap.

So I don't know if overlap is the...

best term for this but for me it's more like they're intermingled perhaps just like the the mishmash of threads and yarn in the slide here in the jam board so so we need to so when looking at systems you can't avoid the complexity the systems are inherently complex and yeah that's kind that's how i got into it


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, that, you know, mass of threads or whatever you want to call it or branches just reminds me of the thoughts that I've had or feelings of like a ball of yarn, you know, this interconnectedness.

And so it's like, oh, how do I start like pulling the thread?

You know, and then where do I see where there's, you know, some entanglements?

So that I really like that, I guess.

Yeah, so that's kind of like, that little mass seems to be kind of dissipating a little bit or whatever, kind of coming apart.

But we also have these like tight balls too.


SPEAKER_00:
When Carlos Gershenson has spoken about complexity and he just does such a great job of

communicating it in a way that's accessible as well as also there's something there for people who have learned a lot.

He talks about how the word comes from and is related to nexus and plexus, like your solar plexus.

And so there's that interweaving and the mesh, but it's not just that we want to make it

rectangular again we don't want to just simply dissect it so that oh well if only you know the brain was arranged like city streets then we could make sense of it it's like that's not gonna happen so how are we going to make sense of the nexus not just dissect the nexus so complexity speaks to a lot of these pieces so let's look at how some other people discovered i was born into a complex world

Very true.

Spoon feeding from a long toothed mentor.

So I don't know what the length of the teeth correlates with.

but that's who they were.

Bioethicist, technoethicist.

So this is definitely the case that a lot of people will be working in a field and recognize like, I'm working on climate or I'm working on income or something like that.

There's a technical side and there's an ecological side, there's a social and there's an intersubjective.

We can't just ignore these other areas that we're not actively thinking on because our project is going to fail.

But if we went into every area and tried to map it all out, again, it'd be 20 years before we even knew what we were doing.

So what is a strategy that will help us deal with that?

Discovered complexity science through listening to dialogues from Daniel Schmachtenberger, Jordan Hall, and other Game B peeps.

Another domain with a lot of overlap, thinking about socio-techno-economic systems and the design of them and what game have we been in?

What game do we want to be in?

Why do we want to be in a different game?

How are we going to be in a different game?

Physics and network science.

some classic complexity there studied process engineering and control systems in school trademark sensing contradictions and feeling compelled to explore so

We see a lot of the routes here from some of the technical and science and engineering and mathematical domains to the social to just one person who can make all the difference by just kind of repeatedly this long toothed person who was repeatedly spoon feeding and just giving a little bit or

agreeing and amplifying.

Somebody brings up a cool observation.

It's like, wow, you know, you're not the only person who's wondered about that.

And some people who have wondered about the vortex or about how those insects are making decisions as a group.

Like we work together and we talk about this together.

Letting the scales fall from my eyes.

Also pretty interesting.

Any other thoughts or ready to continue?


SPEAKER_02:
This is not necessarily related to perhaps discovering complexity, but I think a big part of it is figuring out how to articulate the narrative, how to tell about what we are sensing.

That's

That's one of the I think one of the key challenges so we can convey that to other people and have some common language between many different kinds of peoples with many different experiences.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

And the then what?

So that sets us up well for slide four.

So go to number four where we have.

Complexity, learning, and applying.

And it was fun because we were going over this slide.

And in the previous iteration, it had this double-headed arrow, you know, on the flat earth, on the x-axis, separating learning and applying.

And then we had a really interesting conversation that was like, is this how we want to visualize or represent learning?

learning and applying complexity is it like a knob you know zero is a hundred percent learning and uh you know zero percent the other and then you twist it is it like a linear scale or are there other ways that we can think about or talk about learning and applying and complexity together so it's just cool to see how that discussion recombined into

the visual layout here.

And then of course, each person looking at this will also just a word or a phrase or an experience will come to mind and you'll put it in the right place.

And then you'll inspire somebody else because they wouldn't have had that thought unless you put the post-it note in that location.

So there's just a lot of interesting dynamics just with the Jamboard.

So is a Jamboard a complex system?

Are we learning complexity?

Are we applying complexity?


SPEAKER_02:
And maybe it's also our experience of interacting with the Jamboard that is actually what's really complicated.

Like, how are we feeling sitting here talking about complexity?

And then there's this flat white screen that we need to interact with, and we need to put all those complicated and challenging feelings about our experience into something quite restrictive.

So how do we navigate that?


SPEAKER_00:
It's a little... Yes, Shirley?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I mean, yeah, there's obvious boundaries here.

So, like, I'm looking at this screen, but then I feel compelled to actually look out this window next to me while thinking about what you're saying.

But yet I'm still, I keep on looking at the screen, and that brings me back to some constraints, some feelings of constraints.


SPEAKER_00:
The interactive media is something that helps us enrich even a constrained experience.

If you listen to a one-hour lecture on feedback loops in a meta way, it was just not a feedback loop.

It was just being projected into you versus a one-hour conversation on feedback loops.

Even if both people are just learning the concept, it's like, oh, we're getting it because...

conversation is like a feedback loop or because when you typed a search into the query box, you got some information back and then that modified our conversation.

So whatever feedback loops are, we're kind of doing that with this interaction.

And then that reminds me of the sensory processing, Yana, that you spoke about, because sometimes

when people think of sensory processing in like a computer sense, it's like, we're going to get the info and then we're going to filter it and compress it.

And that will be the processing.

But actually we enrich our sensory experiences with what we know and across modalities of sense.

And so then complexity in that way, it's like a lens that we can enrich our experiences with.

So what does that speak to learning while applying?

Nice.

This looks like a circle or an oval.


SPEAKER_02:
What I understood from what you're saying, Daniel, is that it's about the interaction and these conversations that we have.

So it's not just one sided or this idea of pouring

information into so-called empty vessels in this trope that we've been hearing for a good long time so we already know things we already experience we experience since we have been since we started being so we already know but how do we how do we share what we know with other people and listen to others

to to enrich our not just to enrich our own experience but to also give space for others to express their own experience as well so we all kind of benefit from from each other's sharing yep what does it look like or mean when we include people in the complexity process


SPEAKER_00:
It's not just a body of work that we're pointing to like, well, this is the end citation on this topic.

You know, once you get these equations or once you've read this book, then your questions will be answered.

That's the complexity as object mentality.

But then the complexity is process, which is really what so many of these core terms and the fringe terms are about.

about processes.

So to take a process driven approach and a lot of the things that people are this looks like kind of some interacting shapes.

The cherry is that preserves or is it the sweetness of communicating?

Having fun?

So, and then this is also, this one looks cool.

Kaley diagram for Z2, X, Z3, X, Z3, X, Z4.

Don't know what it means, but the one in a hundred people for who this diagram is meaningful to them, they're here.

And so it will be exciting to learn about that because someone is getting really excited when they think learning by complexity by doing, that's what comes to mind.

that's a person to learn from just like all these other ones are.

So that's like really fun.


SPEAKER_02:
It actually reminds me of a neural net with all like the interconnected links and the nodes.

So it looks like a neural network.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Let's go to five.

So five, pretty broad question.

What is something you're curious or wondering about?

So it could have come up this past week of our regular work, could have come up in the evening, having a little dream adventure, could have just come up from one of these previous slides.

I'm wondering what some of these images on the previous slide meant or what they

represented or why they're meaningful for the person who put them there?

What were we curious about as organizers?

What was something where we

you know, we took the time while people are adding whatever post notes and images that they want.

What, what was something that, I don't know, that we puzzled about how to.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, well, actually I was typing mine in and it's, it's not a, as an organizer, but perhaps it could be applied to it.

And that is, um, let's see, how do I phrase it?

Uh,

do we as humans, um, like, you know, there's a lot of, uh, seeking of X of order.

We want to order things.

And we think that that's, that's, we feel compelled to do it.

Like our messy room, we want to put that in order.

And is there a reason why we seek that?

And do we, do we look, uh, or experience our lives and try to seek order?

Um,

And expect it, like as an original kind of state or ideal state.

Okay.

Anyway, that's what I was typing.


SPEAKER_02:
I think there is a tendency.


SPEAKER_00:
Go ahead, Joanna.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks.

I think that's a reaction a lot of us have when we feel maybe overwhelmed or just because our room is messy.

I'm not the tidiest person.

So...

So maybe we're trying to find some kind of balance, some kind of equilibrium.

And if we don't have that around us or in ourselves, we try to create some kind of balance.

But if we go too far and, you know, as Daniel talked about cities and how putting things into blocks and straight lines and right angles and 90 degrees,

it feels like a kind of hyper control because we don't really see that order when we go to the forest or a lake.

There might be some minerals that have that formation of 90 degrees like fluorite or something like that, but for the most part, any kind of fluid structure doesn't need such an order.

So, so there is sort of an inherent balance and

But yeah, I think that's what we're kind of, and I don't mean balance just like with a scale with two weights.

I think balance is something much more complicated and complex.

Since we're here on Complexity Weekend, so we can kind of try to figure out what does balance mean within complex systems?


SPEAKER_00:
What is the shape of community?

What phase is it?

Is it a crystal, a fluid, plasma?

So here's some awesome thoughts.

So thanks everybody who's posting.

How to dig into the field of biochemistry, nutrition, biomechanics to optimize cognitive development for ADHD.

Interesting biological question.

Musubi, energy and interconnectedness and jurisprudence.

A lot of cool terms and ideas there.

Decentralized management systems.

Active inference for societal engineering.

And then I think what Shirley had said about do humans seek order because we think it's an original state of things?

How does it affect how we approach our world?

And non-dualistic balance and complex systems.

So it...

If you see some similarities here, you're probably not the only one because there is a lot of resonance with what people are thinking about.

And that's kind of cool.

Like we don't need to over simplify and say that we're all thinking the same thing because that wouldn't even be the goal, but there's a lot in what people have written.

So thanks for these awesome comments.

Um, so we'll do two more, one about complexity weekend and norms, and then just one about teams.

And then actually we'll leave it at the team one, because that will help reenter us into what we'll experience and gather.

So on number six, what makes complexity weekend an amazing space?

And here we have on the left side, the category of things that we want to see or experience.

And then on the right side, things that we want to avoid or not experience.

i'll start with on the left side something that is always fun to see is a healthy mixture of people who are returning and it's like their second or higher complexity weekend event but also people who are new

to Complexity Weekend and familiar with Complexity as well as totally new to both because every those are kind of there's many ways to partition the archetypes but those are all really important groups of people and so just to be able to continually inject new energies and views totally fresh as well as people who have seen things evolve over the years okay so on the left side being curious

empathy and compassion, being open to people, ideas, and experiences.

On the right side, avoiding long lectures.

Yes, the facilitated sessions, even though a lot of these people give lectures in other contexts, they're interactive.

While we have synchronous time,

most special thing is to actually take advantage of that and so we don't really do like lectures presenters speakers that's why we use the term facilitator because they're facilitating what are they facilitating participation oh it's about participation okay so then it's not just a relationship that's unidirectional

um exclusionary language so maybe however whoever wrote that but what's one thing to keep in mind or like one way that plays out in complexity or otherwise um i wrote that and i guess i mean we've had almost all the time or very frequently we have um people talk about avoiding jargon


SPEAKER_03:
So jargon can be exclusionary if you're not a part of that domain and not familiar with terms.

At the same time, it's kind of like a way to communicate, obviously, with others who do actually perhaps spend a lot of time in the area.

So I don't know.

It's like a balance of thinking about how to include.

I suppose it's more like that.

How do we include people?

How do we, if we want to communicate, perhaps there are other, it depends upon your goals.


SPEAKER_00:
It reminds me of how it's almost like one way of speaking would be like, it's a club and you're not in it.

Like, oh, fractals, dot, dot, dot, dot, dot.

You know, we get it, you know, A and B get it, but C doesn't get it.

A and B are in the club.

So there's, it's a club and you're not in it.

And then there's like,

It's a club and you're welcome.

Oh, that really reminds me of fractals.

I actually already posted in the chat a link to fractals.

So if you've never heard it, that's totally fine.

And then continue talking about it.

So it's like, it is a group of people who know about fractals.

But this is how you're going to join if you want to be in that crew.

And that emphasizes that it's something that is not like isolating.

So even if the term might be exclusionary, because every Complexity Weekend, I always learn some new resource or term or field, but it helps to be like welcomed in alongside learning about it for the first time.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I think it is about the learning that

people are open and want to help others understand rather than engaging in a kind of closed conversation.


SPEAKER_02:
John?

So I don't know if it's, I was kind of thinking something similar that

I don't think we should be afraid of using jargon because when we don't use it, then the people we're talking to are unfamiliar with the language, don't get exposure.

And so exposure is, is really key, but at the same time, we don't want to isolate them.

We don't want to push them out.

So Daniel suggested that, you know, put links and maybe give a brief explanation or say where people can find more information.

So, so I think,

not saying uh specific words that are what you mean um that's also kind of excluding people because then they're not aware that those words exist in the first place so so i think yeah don't be afraid to use your special specialist language um but just be aware that people will have no idea what you're talking about


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And then also here, upside down or right side up, depending on your position, okay to ask dumb questions.

So really all questions are totally welcome.

Let's go to, well, we have limited time, so we'll go to number nine.

and we're gonna just close with nine and talking about it, and then for five minutes, and then we'll have a five minute break before we jump over to gather.

So, nine asks, oh, did we have a different, oh, 10, sorry, go to 10.

I'm gonna actually just, yeah, not gonna change too much, but 10, and this was our new take, which we made as organizers

relative to the previous team forming slide.

So the previous team forming slide was a little bit different layout.

And here we thought of like kind of a new and different way for how we could connect people who might be interested in different opportunities.

And we were thinking about different reasons or different contributions that individuals bring to the table.

And so we thought of kind of a few modes of ways that people connect on what can be important and productive collaborations.

So like on the top right, it's like, here are my interests and skills.

So maybe you can say, I mean, yeah, you know, I do data science, but that's like, I don't, it's a tool that could be applied in various contexts.

So just maybe listing this here with your contact information or not.

And then on the bottom right, it says our team or work could benefit from these perspectives and skill sets.

So maybe somebody is looking for that skill and then they'll post ask and then you'll feel like that is speaking to you.

And then on the left side, here are problems and or opportunities I see.

So maybe you don't have the skill to, by yourself, take advantage of some opportunity or apply for something, but you recognize it as an opportunity and you might nucleate a collaboration that then can make that happen.

And then here are my attitudes and values, which is, it's not, you know, here are my skills or here's what I wanna do.

It's like,

I'm approaching this question in this way.

So then that might be another way that people can connect with each other.

So we'll be on here for just a few more minutes and then we'll head over to gather.

Any thoughts or what would you add in?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, you know, I'll just share that we talked about a potential feature in Gather as well, where we could put a bulletin board, which is an object that we can just actually get from Gather.

It's one of the objects that's already made and see if it would be helpful for people to post about this sort of thing.

I'm looking for a team or here are the problems or opportunities I see.

And then perhaps others can look and find some synergies, similar interests, or even, you know, someone who may think actually in a contradictory way than you could be cool too to discuss their perspectives.

So,

We did not do this this time, but I think that could be a fun thing to do in the future, to have it there and gather, to live and to grow over time.


SPEAKER_00:
So here's problems and opportunities people are seeing.

Technology needs to be in service to more than finance and medicine.

Clean water in Africa.

Attitude and values, sustainable food systems is important.

Anti-matching can be useful.

Synthesize supposedly opposing perspectives.

So a lot of

um interesting ideas and also these asynchronous artifacts because there's people who will be participating in the heartbeat but they haven't woken up yet or they'll join us tomorrow but they're just not watching this live stream it's only going to be a fraction of a global community that can come to any event and it's only going to be a fraction of them who are going to be there at any single moment so we can

excited and really show up for those synchronous interactions that we get to have and then also uh let those who aren't there live know that they're included because they can check here so not everybody wants to share their contact information on a live stream it totally makes sense um so no worries about that feel like you have to share anything but that's what the kind of synchronous piece is so it's 10 after the hour um

I'll just close this by saying we're collaborating online.

So let's all show up and make it a healthy and happy experience for each other.

That concludes the live stream.

We're going to have a five minute break and then we'll hop over to the Gather Atrium, which is in the program.

And it is also the calendar events location.

Any last comments, Jana or Shirley?


SPEAKER_02:
I'm just looking forward to the weekend and meeting everyone and yeah, see you in Gather.

Well, come along.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks both and see you everybody in Gather.

Bye.