SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so right now I have been instructed by the creative director to rap a little bit.

So this is Andrea Wong.

This part's for you.

Who is that?

He's Dad!

He's Dad!

He's Dad!

He's Dad!

He's Dad!

He's Dad!

He's Dad!

So, so, so, so this is what it feels like to match wits with someone at your level.

What the hell is it, Katja?

It's a feeling of freedom of saying the light.

It's Ben Franklin with a key and a kite.

You see it, right?

The conversation lasted two minutes, maybe three minutes.

Everything we said in total agreement.

It's a dream and it's a bit of a...

She's trying to climb up the chair and that was distracting me.

So we're going to stop there because Ben Franklin with like a key and a kite.

So I was talking to Ben Franklin, the statue, when we were at Wharton for a leadership thing.

And I have a picture of that on Facebook.

Excuse me, madam.

Excuse me, direct.

And this, yeah, so Mimo instructed me to rap.

And so I did.

And that song reminded me of the time I was talking to Ben Franklin on a bench.

And at that time, there were...

There are two things that came to mind when I remembered Ben Franklin.

The statue, the statue, okay.

Is that number one, that was the trip where I had my second memory of being...

definitely afraid of death because a dear friend, colleague of mine had, um, I got into a major, major motorcycle accident, a Harley, I think.

And, uh, and I, uh, yeah, I just, I couldn't function.

I was crying most of the day.

Um, and I,

some well first the the gardener the the person who is tending the park in in the education center um checked in on me a complete stranger came up to me and gave me a hug and held me while i cried um i i didn't know if she was going to live or not that day and um thank god that you did live because we have stuff to do together my friend

So that's one thing that that brought up.

And the second thing that it brought up was a memory of light.

Hello, a memory of the gates, a memory of light.

So thank you to Robbie for this.

which I have yet to read, but I'm coming back to it.

So that event reminded me of, as well, this leadership fellows program thing that we did at Gemi Pass in Switzerland.

Shout out to Switzerland!

We might be coming back soon.

And we had two mountaineers, husband and wife, who did leadership training as mountaineers.

And it was illuminating.

And Roger loved what he did.

And it reminded me of the time that I received the news that he died.

in an avalanche doing what he loved.

And so I aspire to that kind of death where I'm doing what I love, like hanging out with the creative director and chatting to friends and thinking of audacious art projects to make the world a better place.

To improve the state of the world.

I want to talk to mommy.

You can talk to mommy in a second.

I want to talk to her on the phone.

Hi, mommy.

Hi, Mimo.

She's talking to me on the phone.

Yeah, that's mommy right there.

You can talk to me forever.

Just watch this all the time.

But since we don't know when we're going to die, if we don't do what we love right now, if I don't do what I love right now, I risk not being able to achieve my dream of dying doing something I love.

So that can happen at any moment, death can happen.

And so, yeah, these are the things, this is like, these are the memories that I had.

And this is a message to Sean about the Crystal Palace.

The Crystal Palace, or sorry, the Memory Palace idea that came out of Complexity Weekend 2020 is that I'm going to offer you this.

And this is what I understand.

And Alex, correct me, please.

This is what I understand yoga to be.

Hi, Mommy.

Well, one aspect of it.

I mean, one aspect of it.

And this is in my Buddhist meditation practice.

And just the Tao of nature is that...

life that the life that we're living the complex adaptive system the whole thing the universe whatever how far we define it um it is it is a memory palace we just need to pay attention to the signs and this is why living like being here now is so important is because we miss it when we miss the signs we don't pay attention so for example um mims

Mims here is playing with a penguin and who else have you got there?

Penguin and?

Bunny.

Bunny.

So there's something significant about penguins and bunnies.

And it's my job to find out because everything's connected, right?

Everything's connected.

So that one simple thing.

The rotating one simple thing, our energy gets deployed and transformed in so many different ways.

Being here now, meditating, all of these practices, whatever practice you're doing,

Hi, Mims.

Hi, Mims.

Hi, Mims.

Shout out to Miss Adele for giving Mimo a very Filipino nickname to her nickname, which is Mims.

You just take the first syllable and you make it plural, basically.

That's where Jax comes from.

Okay, so that's it.

We are the world.

We are the world.