SPEAKER_00:
Hey everyone, thanks for joining.

It's the March 2022 Complexity Weekend Heartbeat.

We're going to have about 20 minutes of some cybernetic tunes by Michael Garfield, and then we'll have a organizers introduction that'll be interactive.

So whether you're watching live or in replay, thanks a ton for joining.

See you in about 20 minutes for the rest of this organizers introduction live stream, followed by the rest of the heartbeat

like all synchronous activities at Complexity Weekend, being in this synchronous gather space that I'm in right now.

So enjoy.

See you in about 20 minutes.


SPEAKER_02:
Help me!


UNKNOWN:
Thank you.

Bye.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Bye.

Bye.

so

Thank you.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
okay all right greetings amir okay okay well hello everyone welcome to the march 2022 heartbeat live stream slash recording uh i'm daniel amir would you like to say hi or say anything just to sort of open this before we start with the slides


SPEAKER_01:
Hi.

Great to be here.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Okay.


UNKNOWN:
All right.


SPEAKER_00:
Let me just resize it a tiny bit.

Soon.

Well, anyways...

This opening live stream is going to have a few parts.

We're just going to give some brief overviews of CW and then talk more about the Heartbeat event itself.

So whether it's your first time or returning to a CW Heartbeat, welcome to the community of practice.

The first Complexity Weekend event was in person in 2019 in downtown San Francisco.

And since then, we've had two weekend cohort-based experiences per year.

And we're heading into our next one, which is going to be in April.

And this is where CW has been through.

And...

This has set up a rhythm of every six months, this cohort-based weekend with a pre-weekend of several weeks leading up to it.

And then some weekend experience and these monthly heartbeats that are there to welcome first-time participants, but also connect and hopefully do more and more different things.

as things develop and the monthly heartbeats are co-organizer teams.

So this month it was Amir and I, but anyone would be totally welcome to be on a co-organizer team.

And do you wanna maybe mention anything about co-organizing Amir?

Like who would you encourage or think would be a great organizer and help and contribute a lot via the heartbeats?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I think it's an open thing.

It's a nice entry point, actually.

If you're not sure that you can co-organize anything, then it's fun.

It's chill.

It's not stressful.

Just go and do it.

And then you do the live stream.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

uh also hopefully with the larger teams of organizers we would be able to have like um the live stream could consist of people who want to be on it not every organizer would have to come on to live stream and there'd be a lot more bandwidth to for example have the facilitators connect for the live stream too so it can be a lot of things and as amir said it is very chill but also um

It's an opening for people who wanna see some kind of improvement or some kind of reach out to another community or integration with another kind of event.

And the same could be said for being on a weekend co-organizing team, but that has like a longer commitment over the months leading up to the weekend, rather than the weeks leading up to the heartbeat.

But all just to say that participation is sort of the baseline and that's like a little like organizer window because we hope to include more people in all these different roles.

So the April 22 participant registration is open and the pre-weekend is beginning in the upcoming week.

So just register or for whatever upcoming event you're at when you listen to this.

uh this is the figure we usually show for community structure with participants as the biggest circle and the two main ways that participants join or get involved with the community through the weekends like the april 22 weekend or through these heartbeat events and then we have a few organizers and a few facilitators per event

associates and supporters are those who are um supporting the community in some way and then there are teams and committees which we'll talk about anything you want to add on this mirror um nothing in particular okay in 2022 our uh calendar is set for

the events that we will have it's on the site that I will put into the live chat now and under the events and the calendars tab

Here are all the dates for the upcoming events.

And as we develop our website, we'll be able to have ways for auto-adding all of these dates, not just seeing them interfaced here, but this gives the time of all the heartbeat intervals for the rest of 22 and other information.

And we'll include links to RSVP as a facilitator or an organizer to be on that co-organizer team for any of these events.

So that's one way to join in is as an organizer or a facilitator for any event for a heartbeat or for a weekend.

Here is a list of the committees.

So this is on that same website, the committees tab, and it lists the different committees, some of which are more active than others, and their meeting day and time in UTC.

And it's all in the atrium gather space where the heartbeat is as well.

So any of these committees, you can read about what they're up to.

And hopefully as there's more and more participation on each committee, there will be better and better ways for them to communicate back out what they're working on.

Perhaps this could have gone here, but the cohorts for the weekend and then the heartbeat has kind of a microcosm of that are great.

consisting of people coming from a lot of different time zones and countries and areas in the global sense.

And then also from the familiarity with learning and applying complexity.

Okay, so previously in Heartbeat live streams, we've had some slides and for the values and these sort of things listed here, there was the slides that were versioned by the organizers.

And then there was the editable or the commentable and editable GDoc with the values and all the other comments.

And so we've now through a...

process of having having people add and comment and then kind of merge it and archive the other comments um we on the same website which will be the link in the chat um in the values tab you can read the mission and some notes as well as just distillations purpose

values and so like for example these were the things that had been listed on the slides previously for those who have watched other live streams or um read them on your own time at the values page um as well as a list of organizational alignments that are in progress

and completed and proposed.

So,

a good resource that hopefully more and more people are helping edit and improve so that we can have good information and transparency and just improve how we reach this artifact and what it means to us and then also there's a participation guidelines which was previously in the slides was like

There were the values and then the participation guidelines.

So that's two separate pages here.

And there's a general participation guideline section.

And then there's some role-based facilitator, organizer, supporter, associate, event-based roles and their guidelines.

as well as some information on behavior requiring mediation, which hasn't come up or the extreme cases have not come up.

But as we grow and continue to experience new areas of phase space, we want to be really proactive about

how we want to set best practices for the community.

So all of this is a work in progress and people can get involved with this project or any other in CW.

Anything you want to add on any of those parts, Amir?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, one of my favorites in the values is that complexity weekend is itself a complex system, which is something good to take, especially if you're not sure what your role is.

Then the moment you're there, this is already your role.

You're already a part of the

complex uh difficult to to predict and and analyze exactly uh process which is complexity weekends as a complex system so so keep in mind that when you're not sure what you're doing because this may happen it happens to me and this is the the mob this is a nice um inspiration


SPEAKER_00:
Would you like to connect that to some of the discussions we had in the organizing sessions about recording?

Or I'll mention it too, if you don't want to.


SPEAKER_01:
I'm not sure exactly what you're referring to.


SPEAKER_00:
Like the difference between recording, how does one's presence get recorded in an event through participation?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, yes.

So we were...

We were recording my own facilitation video for the April weekend.

We had a long discussion that led to the recording.

But the moment there is a recording, a recording is a part of the... A recorder is an observant.

just as you are.

It observes and you are aware of its observation.

I was, as a child, a very difficult child to take photographs.

My father really likes

take pictures and videos.

I mean, of course, everybody likes it, but it was the 90s, and it was not that common for everybody to have a video camera and that.

And I was always aware of the camera, which made me a very unphotographic person.

So the presence of any recording or any historical documentation already changes how you are to this.

So this is a segmenting element which is happening in the Complexity Weekend, especially now in this kind of session and in general.

Since everything is potentially recorded nowadays, you can't really be sure if it's recorded or not.

It's always there.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

I'll like add another angle on that that was from the discussion was there's this kind of recording in the sense that a MP3 file comes out of it.

Like a video file is of the so-called recording of the event, like the live stream results in a recording or the video file saved.

But then there's the biological recording, like the memory and the implicit and the subconscious influence of attention to a given participatory act, whether it's on a recorded video file or just the thousands of pieces of metadata recorded.

and packets and just perturbations and all of that in the whole digital and thought system.

And then about how like it related to having just different participant backgrounds and perspectives and familiarity.

If someone is

for example, the least familiar with a given topic in a given conversation or a given room, like everyone knows more about control theory or cybernetics or feedback loops.

By being there, that person is like enacting and participating or just listening, but asking questions that is changing that complex system

of interacting people who might be medium to very familiar with feedback loops, cybernetics, etc.

And then it's like that beginner familiarity participant, whatever their age is, or their other experiences, they're modifying this complex participation system.

And so it's not like, oh, I don't know enough about this topic to go.

it's still something that might come to mind but like how do we rethink how much skill one perceives to be needed to join a session on the kind of things that we're going to talk about in this program or in the weekend


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I think a good example, maybe some people may be aware of the phenomenon that somebody speaks your own native language, but not as a native speaker.

Somebody learned your language.

maybe in the english speaking mode it's not it's not an obvious thing that when it happens uh it doesn't happen commonly so somebody speaks your native language as a foreigner and you it's it's very hard not to reduce your own language to

It's very hard to speak normally with that person.

You immediately slow down, and you lose a bit of the natural rhythm of your own language, because you perceive that the other person is not that familiar with that language.

So this is maybe an example, because it shows something which is so hard to control.

It just comes into the system, the interaction, this communication.

context, and it's almost uncontrollable how you speak in this context.

Yeah, similar happens in a learning context, in a complexity context, when there are different people of different backgrounds and different levels of familiarity, certainly.

Whether we want it or not, it happens.


SPEAKER_00:
One other thought on that was something I heard Professor Mike Levin say recently, which was the difference between learning and being trained.

Because being trained, it opens ones up to their trainer not having their interest in mind or something like that, or the inability to perform without the trainer's presence or all these other strange things that a neural network architecture could get entrained into.

But then learning is...

updating our cognitive models which is also related to how we act and so there are quite a few interesting things i think we learned and um it hopefully opens a window for some who could see their participation in a different light not like the last three minutes of us talking necessarily though that would be cool but

How do we have that be something that people implicitly feel is cool and good to do and worth a few hours on their weekend?

So complex problems for people to think about, especially who like to organize.

Let's talk about this heartbeat.

so the heartbeat program is available at the link in the chat and we are currently in this live stream following this live stream we will have one-on-one sessions um

I guess actually a mirror can facilitate if you're still here.

Then we do spotlight talks and posters, which is just an open time when people who are there and want to can give up to five minutes, just something on something.

And then Steven will be facilitating a session on physically inhabiting peripersonal and extended quantum reference frames.

That'll be 20 UTC on Saturday, and then feel free to hang out, but that's the end of the first interval.

And then the second interval, there's before the interval begins, just if you want to check your audio-visual or see who's around.

Then we'll begin with Amir.

leading the um 101 session then Michaela emsh with the bio-infused communication followed by spotlight talks and then there's a open but updatable hour that we'll see what happens in yeah those who are there

so big thanks to steven and michaela for being facilitators in this heartbeat and anyone who wants to be a facilitator can be a facilitator this was um wow looked the same there's like four of us on the live stream it's pretty funny um it was uh amir and i so amir thanks a lot it was a very

interesting co-organizing experience as they all kind of tend to be when we can work on like a project and on something that's a learning journey as well.

After this live stream with the first slide section and then the Jamboard very soon, everything else is gonna be in Gather.

so the link to gather will be put uh is in the program all these links that say gather atrium will take you to this space and play around with it test the settings if you need to do anything see the chat and the people tabs for this sort of ephemeral messaging and to see who's in the space and

This is screen share, emojis, and muting and have your video on or off.

Do you have anything to add about Gather?


SPEAKER_01:
I just discovered there's a version 2 of the interface.

I don't know how new it is to people, but you can really spin it all around.

If you go to the settings and check the experimental thing, it all goes different directions.

I just tried it for five minutes.

Maybe it's worth a try.

Maybe it's even better.

I don't know.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, they definitely add features subtly and interestingly.

And for those who are new or for those who have watched our tools and website, everything developed over the years, you'll see we're using Coda more as this document format.

And it'll also be the participant single source of truth, the PSSOT in the April weekend.

And that will allow a lot more information, a lot of flexibility and co-editability, commentability, and

ability to like use the chat for chat and have some people who like to curate information and improve a little niche.

We'll have some awesome opportunities to build information and perspectives and teams asynchronously.

And we're just really looking forward to how that works in the coming few weeks before the April weekend.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I think it's a very nice tool, this code.

I just learned about it recently in the organization context.

And it is more inviting than Google Docs in many ways.

You can do quite a lot of interesting things with it.


SPEAKER_00:
It allows a lot of awesome things, and including this ability to,

push public websites as well as have internal knowledge resources and many other things.

Coda is a complex system.

A lot of cool opportunities that already I know some people in the community are doing.

So there's various ways to support CW.

Just showing up and being there are most important as well as any feedback or word of mouth recommendations or just sharing information.

There are joining teams with other participants, and then there are the committees.

And then also you can provide any financial support.

Okay.

Anything else to add, or do you want to go to the Jamboard?


SPEAKER_02:
Let's go.


SPEAKER_00:
Let's go.

Okay.

All right.

I will just resize some things, so just one second.

Anything you want to add about using Jamboard?


SPEAKER_01:
I'm honestly one of the people who often get a bit overwhelmed.

But now I have the organizer role, so I have to take the role.

Just flow with it.

I don't know how many people are participating, but it can be things moving around there.

So let's just do it.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

So let's just start with a blank slide.

Okay.

So I'll keep the sidebar open so people can see how to make a new note with the sticky note button to do some drawing.

to add text.

So where do we even begin?

How do we initiate complex experience?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, now we go back to the windows here.

yeah okay so uh where do we begin so they are the first page here yeah um let's see


SPEAKER_00:
By saying hello?

Where to begin what?

So anyone can write something.

We'll maybe just, since we have about up to 30 minutes on this Jamboard, we'll be on this one for a few minutes and then go to some of the other questions.

But then let's just see what people can add here for now.


SPEAKER_01:
Actually, I'm now discovering things on the Jamboard that I never tried before.

What is a laser?

Oh.


SPEAKER_00:
What do you think this serves?


SPEAKER_01:
What purpose do you think this serves?

It's interesting that they have this feature.

It's something for, I mean, you need the laser in an actual physical, in the actual physical world.

You need to point at something so people pay attention, I guess.

I guess it's useful here in a similar way, but I'm not sure.

You can still say yes.

So if you have a more specific presentation than what we have here on this, you can talk.

Yeah, so if we talk about emergence, so I can mark it here now.

I guess it's a similar purpose in a normal, in a physical place.


SPEAKER_00:
Here's what the laser makes me think of.

So this Jamboard session leaves a digital trace.

That's all the metadata and all the servers and everything like that, of course.

But then there's the one that we're accessing right now, like the little fragment that we're accessing in all this stuff.

So then there's the part that will be

quote reviewable later like the audio visual of this live stream which is identical though at a different time if you're watching live or in replay but it's it's inaccessible to participate in it but still you could look at this asynchronous resource but the laser if it's

It's like only if you're synchronously watching the video and taking the time to engage with the timing of thought and the multiple seconds that it takes to really like listen to someone in their time versus the asynchronous knowledge resource, which can be kind of all at once and overwhelming because we have to find our own path.

but like the laser being kind of self-guided versus someone else guiding the laser, but then it's always a little of both.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I was just thinking, so the laser is the only thing not recorded on the gem board.

Right.

At least for us, but it may be actually recorded as additional data that the laser was doing this and that.

It's somewhere in the history of the gem board.

Who knows?

We're not the engineers.

But it is anyway recorded now in the video of the live stream.

So now the laser on the gen board and your screen capture of this to the live stream, this is the closest thing that we have now in the digital world to the actual life in the physical world.

Now you have a camera, and the camera is the screen capture.

And it's recording the only thing that happens completely live in the computer, which is this laser.

The only thing which is like the analog world, basically.

It doesn't have a proper history.

I mean, at least there's not a recorded history.

Maybe, of course, there is a physical history, but who knows.


SPEAKER_00:
Mm-hmm.


SPEAKER_02:
Mm-hmm.


SPEAKER_00:
So one, one thing that made me think of was like, you could use it as a voting.

You can have people do in a synchronous session.

So just do make a laser move.

And then you could video analyze like the screen or something, or just look at it computationally somehow and have like an invisible, but transiently visual decision.

based upon how people were instantly moving their lasers this is this was the whole problem falling through triangulate

what are the notes and then here's what are the lasers because um well not that there's one single meaning of course of anything but let's just say that there's two different facilitated sessions that might happen at CW so one of them is like we're gonna do silent post-it adding

So in that case, it's the maximum possible attention on the asynchronous resource.

We're going to do just a silent Coda hackathon and just really improve the Coda for like 20 minutes or something like that.

The other one would be a pure laser session where it just is on a blank board or something like that.

yeah it would be interesting to have such a tool which which doesn't have all the other stuff there only the laser that is completely unrecorded in the experience at least so for the laser session people have to be there quote you had to be there for the post-it session or coda updating session or the knowledge resource updating session

it leaves this more exposed artifact because it results in writing or some kind of modification, like stigmergy.

But then the conversation or the laser, it doesn't always leave a mark, not in that same way.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
But it's still part of the experience implicitly or explicitly.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, it changes the mark in the biological sense, what we mentioned before, in this type of history.

So if I go here, and I don't know, I use a laser to say hello.

So now you've been said hello to with the laser.

It left no mark, but now it left a mark on you.

It can be an entire story that they write there or whatever.

Also, some interesting... Oh, wait a minute.

I'm not sure which... I'm not sure what's happening first in my... It's some very strange... Oh, what's going on here?

This is funny.

I think there was some phenomenon of relativity now in the... in the...

in the Jamboard.

I think it's hard to reconstruct this, but I think I just experienced that synchronicity in the Jamboard directly, in my Jamboard, is not the same synchronicity

in the video, in what I see here in the gather, in what you're sharing.

So somebody was doing something with laser and then later, or at the same time, somebody was deleting this thing that I suppose you began with the entire page here.

Oh, it's so hard to describe this.

So basically, the actual Jamboard, which is loaded on my browser and what I am seeing that you share with me now and with the entire video sharing now, they were not in the same

frame of reference in the relativity sense in the sense of of special relativity one just took longer to get to you

Yes, something.

But it was not talking just about the delay, but things that happened synchronously on one were not synchronous on the other.

Things that happened in the Jamboard.

This was a very strange thing that was happening.

Unexpected communication phenomena.

We need fireworks.


SPEAKER_00:
For what?


SPEAKER_02:
Wait a minute.


SPEAKER_00:
Anything else you want to add on this slide or we'll continue on?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I guess we can move on.

Okay.

Before I continue talking about quantum theory in the jamboard or whatever.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

So slide number three.

What is your intention today?


SPEAKER_01:
Do we write or do we laser?

Exactly.


SPEAKER_00:
Where do you think silence fits into complexity?

Anyone in the chat or anyone in the Jamboard or Amir?

What fits into complexity?

Silence and complexity.

Silence.

Silence fills the gaps and invites emergence.


SPEAKER_01:
Silence fills the gaps.

I think, yeah, it's a very deep idea.

Gaps is emptiness, but silence is not empty.

It's not a vacuum.

Yeah, you see, I think it really depends.

I mean, sometimes silence, at least for some people, silence, just a thought does continue, you know.

You know this in meditation.

It's silence, but I'm not sure that in meditation, the silence helps collecting the thoughts.

Often you get the thoughts uncollected there, and they continue.


SPEAKER_00:
Does silence make you uncomfortable?

And the corollary, what kind of silence makes you uncomfortable?


SPEAKER_01:
I would say, here silence hardly disturbs me at all.

I just speak because I have something to say.

I don't feel disturbed by moments of silence here, but it disturbs much more in real life.

when there's a person in the same space, I guess.

Famously, silencing the elevator is the most disturbing one.

And it's the shortest one and the one which is most deemed to be over quite soon.

Hopefully, if the elevator is not stuck.

But still, it's the most disturbing silence.

This short, very definite in length silence in the elevator disturbs so many people.


SPEAKER_00:
What is it about elevators?


SPEAKER_01:
I don't know.

But I think I was wondering now if the elevator actually gets stuck.

then the silence will be much less disturbing actually there will probably be less silence because if you will eventually begin you will have something to talk about the elevator is stuck it's a topic um and then then silence will be less disturbing this is strange how can it be that the the most disturbing the most famously disturbing science is such a short one it's such a silly one


SPEAKER_00:
in the end of it well if context counts as a complexity idea what is before and during and after the silence is it the nano silence in between like two syllables that allows you to actually hear speech or is it a facilitated session on

ecosystems that starts with 10 minutes of reflection or laser work or post it work without audio or without video or without either or logging off gather for 15 minutes


SPEAKER_01:
But remember that, you know, I guess, I don't know, people over 30 can have enough experience from the internet in the days, but it was really exciting.

Actual communication with people was basically, it was in IRC and these kind of things.

So you had a much more silent experience.

Maybe we grew on that, so we still perceive other things as extra.

But the basic is pretty silent in the communication mode of the internet.


SPEAKER_00:
Does an elevator really elevate?

It also lowers.

Why?


SPEAKER_01:
I guess it doesn't elevate you.

Even if it takes you up, it doesn't elevate you spiritually in any way.

It's the most mundane thing that goes up.

It's not like elevating yourself up on a mountain.

This is an elevating experience.

Okay.

And actually, it is true what you're saying, because the energy that it takes for an elevator to go up is the same as it takes to go down.

It's not falling down when it goes down.

So it's on a balance anyway.

So it's just the same.

It's not helping you more.

It is, but it's, yeah.

This was a very interesting observation.


SPEAKER_00:
something gets some well they say what goes up must come down and maybe there's different kinds of elevators like one where weight like is counterbalanced maybe they all have to work on that principle but maybe there's other ways to do it like a penicular it's a there is a sort of um a sort of elevators or or short subways


SPEAKER_01:
in which it's just one line and it goes .

Oh, yes.

So when one goes up, the other goes down.

But then it doesn't use gravity at all, basically, which is true for every elevator.

But yes, you can make use of it.

But I don't think they're that common.


SPEAKER_00:
not communicating is also communicating you know that's true on on many levels too like your silence says everything or um the fact there's times where it's the non-communication is just expected like we just haven't crossed paths that we live in different parts of the world so are not communication is not super meaningful it's just sort of the baseline expectation but then

within the context especially of a relationship or a conversation which is like a transient relationship experience then having space in the conversation is very meaningful in the patterns it relates to who speaks up and what people

how what they hear impacts them, and how much they get to process, do laser work, do post-it work.

Let's do one more slide.

And then we'll go together.

This slide, or do you suggest a different one, Amir?

Let's see.

Where are you now?

Oh, this is different.

How can complexity have impact in real-world systems?

Let's do that one.

Slide five.


SPEAKER_01:
Actually, the question is already framed interestingly.

How can complexity have impact on a real-world system?

But then, what do you mean, how can it?

It does.

It's there.

I guess we're talking about complexity signs.

JOHN MUELLER JR.

: Exactly.

Good questions.

MIHAI IONESCUA- This would make the question too long for the page.

So we have complexity.

Complexity signs.

There's complexity in these complexity signs.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Obviously, complexity is the thing.

In parallel, there's systems.


SPEAKER_01:
Which is, by the way, for some theorists, it could be that complexity is

In some sense, complexity science flips the order of things.

Complexity is a character.

Maybe it's even a measurable thing in a system.

In a way, system is the major thing.

But I suppose that in the context of complexity science, it focused on complexity because of this measurability in the widest sense of the word, measurability, that it is quantitative fields.

What systems theory?

Thanks.


SPEAKER_00:
That's really interesting.

So it made me think about how there's systems.

People will say, how can systems have impact or how can we use systems?

Let's add complexity thinking, like complexity as a thinking approach.

And I think all these terms here, the systems thinking, system science, systems theory, like general systems theory,

And if someone said, well, can you measure complexity science?

It'd be like saying, can you measure chemistry science?

But if you say, can you use chemistry to measure scientifically this compound's molecular mass?

So then when it's framed as just like

complexity or systems, then it's like, well, can we measure those systems?

Can we measure complexity?

And that's where we see computational complexity and information theory and a lot of other measures or Lyapunov exponents, measures of system complexity, as well as resilience and other metrics.

But if it was like resilient science, the question wouldn't even be, can we measure it?


SPEAKER_01:
Again, I lost you in the 20 seconds here.


SPEAKER_00:
Talking about complexity as a system's property or resilience as a system's property lends itself, one, to asking how to measure it.

If temperature is a property of systems, then how do you measure temperature?

Yeah, exactly.

But by saying that it's, can you measure complexity thinking?

That's like a question about psychometrics, which might be interesting, but that's like a kind of secondary question, actually.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, it's already, yeah, it's, yeah, it's for very specific purposes, that it's not the,

a measurement of complexity thinking so here in a more general time yeah it's measurement yeah measurement of level maybe you can yeah generalize into measurement of level of complexity of complete complexity level of thinking so how much of thinking

The thinking of a person is complex.

So how far it goes to higher level obstructions and these kind of things.

So this may be measurable in the psychometric sense, as you said.

And then it's, yeah, this would be a measure of complexity of thinking in a way.


SPEAKER_00:
So just to read some of these other notes, and then we'll give last thoughts, Amir.

Do we really always have to measure everything qualitative versus not?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, this is, of course, this thought in the background that continues to nudge me all this time that we're talking about these measurements.

Yeah, I found that especially in the wider systems theory, there's some things which are

just more qualitative in their nature.

Especially in cybernetics, I found that there's some focus on communication, not in the information theory sense, but in a more qualitative sense, even psychological sense.

But with a complexity, so to speak, perspective.

There's a lot of room for the qualitative

Descriptive, yeah.

Wish I don't have much to add to that point.


SPEAKER_00:
Well said, though.

Just to read these last post-its.

So it can, not, it does, most of our context is complex.

Everything is ecosystems.

What is key in a system is the fluxes rather than the nodes.

This is not yet recognized.

But will one day, and that day, complexity thinking will be helpful.

do we really always have to measure everything?

And that's the same syntax put in two different contexts.

So the mirror duplication and their differential context, it provides meaning and other notes.

So Amir, any final comments before we close this part and head over to gather?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I guess everything is ecosystems.

I like this one.

And maybe in a way, it goes back to this quality.

I was thinking about

the famous collection of papers of Gregory Bateson, Steps to an Ecology of Mind, and just like this title, you already said so much, Steps to an Ecology of Mind, in which the mind,

I don't know, holy grail of philosophy or whatever, is something which is ecological in the deeper sense, not just in the... Usually people think about ecosystems and ecology as something, as the natural world in the naive sense of the term.

But if we think of minds, big thing as a part of ecology,

then it puts out the challenges that we're facing in a whole different perspective and it emphasizes that it goes back it's a part of an answer to this question of quality because then you have to introduce quality to the to your research to your understanding of complexity wow


SPEAKER_00:
just makes me think about how when we count quantity we lose quality so there's 39 cases of this out of the 65 samples and those become quantity but then qualia and quality and qualitative methods and qualitative perspectives are actually what surround that quantity


SPEAKER_01:
this is this is the risk while while we gain more tools and more well while we essentially in a way reduced our epistemic uh vacuum reduce our epistemic uncertainty in some sense that we have so many tools to analyze and these tools are and quantitative in in their nature we have a more you know we have a big mind that yeah if you have the if you have uh

if you work in some form of a Zettelkasten method or something like that, you can have a big mind map of the entire linked things that you have in your system.

And this mind map would reduce the quality of feeling of how it is to be in that system.

And this quality of feeling inside it, we can't get rid of it.

We need to continue having it in our immediate experience in order to not go crazy when we try to understand what's going on.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

All right.

Thanks for the live stream, Amir.

Thanks for co-organizing.

Everyone who's watching live or in replay, thanks for watching.

And for those AIs that are munching this and treating it as a blob of text in one instant, you're missing out.

But we'll see you all in Gather.

So...

head over to the program, which I'll just paste in the chat again, and hit the Gather atrium.

We will see you there at about 5 or 6 after the hour, and we'll start the one-on-one sessions 10 after the hour.

Thanks again, Amir.

Peace out.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, thank you.

Bye.