SPEAKER_00:
all right i think we're live welcome to the synergetic live stream number 10 on august 22nd 2021 today in the synergetic live stream number 10 the spirit today is uh differentiate and integrate related to this integrator chain idea and learning

Today in 10, we're going to go over some of the key memes and themes and things to integrate, and then go into several sections of text.

First, we're going to talk about the book Cosmography a little bit, and then recap some of the history, tracing back from Synergetics to other ideas like Transcendentalism.

Then there'll be one slide on Structure, and then a section on 935, Octahedron as Conservation and Annihilation Model.

So to restart with some of the key memes and themes, synergetics is relational and multi-scale thinking.

It's connected to our direct experiences.

There's a sense of finiteness and there's no infinitesimals or infinitely large things or points, lines, and planes, at least understood in the traditional sense.

Synergetics is framing design as a process of anticipatory cybernetic science.

And this is something that we'll explore today is there's this relationship between tensegrity and physical applications of tension and compression architecture with synergetics, which is kind of like an even more generalized set of principles, or at least ways to play around conceptually before building it physically.

And that's in a way like the relationship between engineering and physics.

There's also this idea that space has a shape and that's gonna be explored in the closed packings today as well.

And the sense of structure, static or dynamic structure with triangle as the basic unit of structure.

Universe is the total scenario, and system means any specified subsystem, which means it's going to have an inside and outside, therefore shape, the minimum number of units, energy events that make up a system is going to be four.

And this idea of four also comes up not just when talking about tetrahedra, but also thinking about four-dimensional, 4D time lock, that's this shape.

A tetrahedral focus, which has four sides, not a square focus, which has also four sides and two dimensions.

And then also there's other senses of 4D, which we'll be talking about soon.

Nothing's really changed on the things to integrate, but if people have any suggestions, they can let me know.

All right, the first topic is cosmography.

So this is a book that was, according to the introduction, was mostly written before Bucky's physical death or whatever in 1983.

Then it was revised over the following years and published in 1992 with Kiyoshi Kuromiya as the adjuvant, which is drawing on a notion from immunology to sensitize the immune system.

or to carry along and this is an awesome book this is just one of the figures this is figure 2.1 tetrahedra nice very clean tetrahedra and also uh it sounds like uh kyoshi kurumiya was very interesting person so there was a lot of things to research and learn about here

Also, before we kind of dip into these figures, this is from the ebook that was transformed by Brett Elmendorf.

So thanks to Brett for making this ebook accessible.

Just to pull out a few kind of cool figures from Cosmography, here in figure 2.7,

There is the caption.

This represents the three great circle-spun square planes exactly bisecting the tetrahedra in three symmetric ways.

Note the primary tetrahedron and the secondary internal octahedron.

So the big tet and then the inscribed octahedron.

and only then are the implied square cross sections of the octahedron apparent as tertiary derivations of the primary structural system, which is the tetrahedron.

There is no single plane, omni-equal edge,

of omni equal angle equal edge square structural integrity in universe squares and cubes are always and only tertiary derivations of prime vectorial structuring systems so this is kind of an implicit pot shot against the cartesian xyz cubic minecraft reality pixel reality voxel reality

because he's basically showing that you get cubic subdivisions of space or cubic measurements and coordination inside of the symmetry of the octahedron, which can be seen as being one-to-one coexisting with a specific tetrahedron.

Like for every defined tetrahedron, there's a specific octahedron that's inscribed within it and vice versa.

So the fact that they come into coexistence at the same time

You can therefore take a Tet first approach and see the cubic lattice as arising as sort of a downstream consequence of choosing a tetrahedral coordination for your first move, instead of saying that your primary coordinate system is going to be cubic, because I'm not sure all of the reasons, but one of them is there is no structural stability in the cubic arrangement of oranges in a cube.

They would always shift back down to kind of crunch into a closed packing.

And, uh,

There's other maybe reasons too, but that's kind of an interesting figure.

And it's related to the fact that there's six edges in a tetrahedron and that there's six vertices in the octahedron.

So then this is from this George Hart website.

This is a consequence of the fact that an octahedron can be inscribed in tetrahedron.

The six edge midpoints of the tetrahedron are the six vertices of the octahedron.

The octahedron in this image is the intersection of the two components of the stella octangula.

So, pretty cool, shows a lot, and again, that's an interesting thought, that you can get cubic coordination out of a tet system, but it's hard to get clean tets out of a cubic system.

Here's a few pages later in Cosmography on figure 6-3.

It's called Macro Micro Systems Diagram, and it says, in Synergetics, the always and only experientially based geometry of conceptualizing and thinking, I discover first that all experienceable somethings, be they apples, cows, thoughts, clouds, are systems.

And so the starting place is three, the specifically relevant tuned in system.

So for the retina, it's 400 to 700 nanometers of light or whatever it happens to be.

This is like the censoring bound that is detectable of a given,

uh antenna or biological apparatus or sensor or spatial scale that can be seen by a telescope or a microscope and then there's the macro twilight and the micro twilight and that again is sort of like things that are outside the field of vision of the scope or it's kind of like too disciplinary versus too general

uh and in both the micro and the macro twilights that's where there's the the zone of proximal information gain where there's tantalizingly possible relevance it could be significance but the false positive or false negative rate might be very high just like twilight visually and then one in five are like again relative to the defined system

macro irrelevant untuned in universe and micro irrelevant universe so things that are too fast or too slow to be picked up in the measurement fall outside of this band and so there could be important processes happening at both these scales and it's interesting question how we deal with that

six four shows a uh tetrahedron reflecting a minimum system with an insideness and outsideness and so three even though the triangle is the unit of structural stability it turns out that three is still kind of not yet in existence because it doesn't have space enclosure yet so it can't be it can be conceptualized and you can think about a triangle but it can't exist um as a coherent system

in any physical instantiation and uh there are no parts or elements independent of systems a system always divides all universe into these 10 inter complementary but distinctly different component categories and they're just written here i'm not going to read them but they relate to what happens when you go kind of from zero to one system all of the insideness and outsideness relationships

multiplied by this sort of micro and macro perspective is related to what these points are in 6.4 and then this is a pretty interesting figure 613 the three ways of physically demonstrating the simplest system in universe the four vertexion the tetrahedron the tetra vertexion or four vertexion

be tetrahedron being four sides so why not call it uh four vertex to emphasize that we're not just interested in the faces but in the uh vertices vertexes can be equally validly drawn as one the platonic solid emphasizing the four faces which alternatively are known in synergetics as divergent openings so that's sort of classical platonic tetrahedral solid

That's the face centered approach.

Two, the six lines or edges, which alternatively are known in synergetics as vectors.

So that's sort of an edge first approach.

And then three, the vertex domains, which alternatively are known in synergetics as closest packing of spheres.

And that's related to this 464FEV relationship of the Tet.

And so you can think about the Tet as sort of like a block,

as well as a wireframe as well as closed pack spheres all right that is it for cosmography so let me just mute this okay so on to transcendentalism okay so um

The story kind of begins here with Margaret Fuller, Bucky's great aunt, and the publication, The Dial.

So here's The Dial magazine.

And it was written about The Dial.

The Dial's editors were Ralph Waldo Emerson and Margaret Fuller, as well as frequent contributors such as Henry David Thoreau, Bronson Alcott, etc., etc.,

And to read something from, I believe, the New Yorker piece, the conversations that here Margaret Fuller hosted in Boston between 1839 and 1844 have been called collectively the first consciousness raising group.

By this time, Emerson had formed the intellectual society that came to be known as the Transcendental Club.

The transcendence he espoused was a rejection of established religion in favor of a romantic creed in which faith was one thing with science, with beauty, and with joy.

A soul liberated from blind obedience to Christian dogma would be free to follow its own dictates and to seek a direct experience of divinity in art and nature.

The transcendental gospel suffused Fuller's conversation, but in a more heretical form.

She was encouraging women to become free agents not only in relation to a deity, but in relations with men.

So not sure about all the details on that, but I found that pretty interesting about Bucky's great aunt, Margaret Fuller.

And to kind of rephrase this relationship and then maybe explore some of the commonalities, whether by coincidence or direct cultural transmission.

So this is from Kirby Earner's blog from this February 21 post.

There's also a certain geometry Fuller developed, which we might teach as part of literature since he mostly used prose for it.

American Transcendentalism.

His great aunt Fuller, Margaret Fuller, was likewise a feminist and a first editor of The Dial, which first published Emerson and Thoreau.

So this is kind of mentioning synergetics by and by on the road downstream of what Margaret at all were thinking at this period in time.

so a few quotes from uh margaret fuller i'll just uncrop something on the screen for a second okay so she said one short quote that was really popular online today a reader tomorrow a leader

And then two slightly longer quotes that I think presage a lot of what Bucky wrote about and thought.

So the one on the left says,

all around us lies what we neither understand nor use our capacities our instincts for this our present sphere are but half developed let us confine ourselves to that till the lesson be learned let us be completely natural before we trouble ourselves with a supernatural so that relates to what Bucky talked about in terms of just down here with the donut this is sort of uh

what we neither can understand nor use those wavelengths that are above or below the sensor's range so there's this thread and bucky of developing our ability to perceive or to model faster and slower and different phenomena that we can't directly build and then kind of being in feedback with building and then there's this idea of direct versus indirect perception and then an interesting tension that's in

um not direct opposition but just kind of juxtaposition is that there's this sense of there's more out there than we can directly apprehend but then there's this sense that direct apprehension is the most important thing so that's whether that's operationalism and thinking that action is the most important part rather than knowledge of our existence um

How do we meld these two ideas that we have a prior that we only can experience a small amount, yet we prioritize the experience part?

How do we balance the part that we know might be larger, but we don't directly see?

then here's another quote by Margaret Fuller she said male and female represent the two sides of the great radical dualism but in fact they are perpetually passing into one another fluid hardens to solid solid rushes to fluid so that relates to the maybe some ideas like the jitterbug and phase transitions and some of the thermal thermodynamics um aspect of how the shapes are connected to each other

Another synergetics relationship is how the tetrahedra itself can't tessellate space, but it can co-tessellate.

And also the kind of qualitative quote, unity is plural and at minimum too.

So some kind of ideas from her work and colleagues.

So kind of one visual on that was seeing transcendentalism as a sort of bundle of ideas

threads that came together at a specific time, and there's probably other ways to make this with things coming off to the side, but we can trace that transcendentalist insight, American and otherwise, in theology and metaphysics, philosophy, visual art and writing, specific communities, experiences, one of the branches with geometry and synergetics, and maybe other stuff.

And then also just to close this section, this was from an email that Kirby sent on August 20th, but I thought it was really insightful.

So he wrote, My project has been to link a partially overlapping contemporary of mine, Bucky Fuller, the futurist and dome guy, back to Transcendentalism.

Not only for his relationship to Margaret, grandnephew, nor just for his New England-slash-Harvard-type upbringing, Bear Island, but for his no-more-secondhand God, which I'd categorize as a Transcendentalist classic, if conventions will let me.

It's philosophical, as is his more formalized synergetics.

Two volumes, Macmillan with Ed Applewhite, a collaborator.

I'm Well-Versed Enough in STEM honors Calc at Princeton, full-time math teacher in the 1980s, to be able to synchronize a high school humanities curriculum where we study this transcendentalist stuff to a high school mathematics curriculum that's ahead of the pack and anticipates the mainstream of the future.

bucky stuff is included on the stem science technology engineering mathematics side of the cp snow chasm twix stem and humanities as well as the path side philosophy anthropology theater history and in fact provides our chasm scanning bridge so just to uh catch those up who might not be familiar with the cp snow

this is from a blog posted here the term two cultures has become a shorthand in certain academic circles for the differences between two attitudes the phrase has lived on as a vague popular shorthand for the rift a matter of incomprehension tinged with hostility that has grown up between scientists and literary intellectuals in the modern world this polarization of perspective certainly was a factor in latter 20th century academia

So I remember hearing that in Silicon Valley as the techie and the fuzzy.

And inside and outside of academia,

What cultures are divided?

It's not just that one dimension.

So how do we think about tensegrity for the physical bridges, like this sort of compression and tension device that this fellow is sitting on, bridging the microscope and the philosopher, and then also think about synergetics as being a common structure for some of the conceptual connections that we want to make across fields?

okay for um now a single slide on structure so this is section 600 in synergetics so structure definition structure a structure is a self-stabilizing energy event complex

structure is a system of dynamically stabilized self-interfering and thus self-localizing and re-censoring inherently regenerative constellar association of a minimum set of four energy events three stability means angular invariability

Inherent means behavioral principles that man discovers to be reliably operative under given conditions always and anywhere in the universe.

Regenerative means local energy pattern conservation.

Constellar means an aggregation of enduring, cosmically isolated, locally co-occurring events dynamically maintaining their interpositioning, e.g.

macro constellations such as the Big Dipper, Orion, and the Southern Cross, and micro constellations such as matter in general, granite, cheese, flesh, water, and atomic nuclei.


UNKNOWN:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
So just to kind of give a quick recap on what systems perspectives might be like in synergetics versus hearing about systems perspectives outside of synergetics.

On the left side, it looks kind of like a system diagram that one might see amongst just six relationships being drawn amongst four nodes.

Those are the four circles of different sides.

And so these four nodes, as they are on the left side here,

you could think about them as being arranged on a one or two dimensional space, like they all happen to be unaligned.

So maybe they're the height of four different collaborators, and then the size is their ability of some skill.

Or it could be just that they happen to be out there, but also they could vary in some other way.

But this is a common representation that you might see in the areas of topology, networking graph theory, systems diagrams, like social networks, flow charts, and other areas.

So when we go into synergetics framing, synergetics shows the same four nodes of four different sides, and it's the same six relationships.

So it turns out that it wasn't just a coincidence.

For example, if there was other structures, then it wouldn't be consistent as a synergetic minimum system.

because it couldn't be physically implementable.

But when we put the four in a geometric arrangement, rather than just in a happenstance, like force directed way on the page, we get the idea of vectors, edges, and geometry.

So changes through time, dynamics, and shape, and making things consistent with the shape of space.

There's this tension and compression element, which isn't inherent in just the undirected or directed graph framing.

there's this notion of embodiment because there's a physical interpretation given for uh events then there can be physical subsystem then there's this sort of trim tab sense making cybernetic element uh that can be introduced again also can be worked in here and then also some of these other

cool things that synergetics brings to the table.

So that's kind of what system is, is when you have inside and outsideness split by four energy events.

Okay.

Now to a section on octahedron.

So this kind of interlude is from 935 to 938 annihilation scenario.

This is section 935 octahedron as conservation and annihilation model.

And so just to

show what shapes come into play here's a tetrahedron cube octahedron so it's sort of the um the egyptian pyramid with a square base and then four triangular sides and two equal ones that are base to base uh kind of like the ethereum logo okay

So not gonna read every single section in this whole piece, but mainly the yellow highlighted sections.

So in 12.

Until the 20th century, scientists in general assumed the light of all the stars to be instantaneously and simultaneously extant.

Universe was an instantaneous and simultaneous system.

The mid-19th century development of thermodynamics, and in particular its second law, introduced the concept that all systems always lose energy and do so in an ever increasingly disorderly and expansive ways.

The academicians spontaneously interpreted the instantaneity and simultaneity of universe as requiring that the universe too must be categorized as a system.

The academicians assumed that as a system, universe itself must be losing energy in increasingly expansive and disorderly ways.

Any expenditure of energy by humans on earth to whom the stars and the heavens were so much just romantic scenery, no more, no less would hasten the end of the universe.

This concept was the foundation of classical conservatism, economic, political, and philosophical.

Those who spent energy were aboard.


UNKNOWN:
13.


SPEAKER_00:
This viewpoint was fortified by all the hundred years earlier concept of classical science's giant, Isaac Newton, who in his first law of motion stated that all bodies persist in a state of rest or in a line of motion except as affected by other bodies.

This law posits a cosmic norm of at-rest, change is abnormal.

This viewpoint as yet persists in all the graphic chart coordinates used by society today for plotting performance magnitudes against the time background, wherein the baseline of no change is the norm.

Change is taken spontaneously as being inherently abnormal and is as yet interpreted by many as being cause for fundamental social concern.

14.

With the accurate measurement in 1887 of the speed of light in vacuum, science had comprehensively new, experimentally redemonstrable challenges to its cosmogony and cosmology.

Inspired by the combined discoveries of the Brownian movement, blackbody radiation, and the photon of light, Einstein, Planck, and others recognized that energy as radiation has a top speed, ergo is finitely terminaled.

So here was just some kind of interesting Bucky takes on quantum.

And he starts off by taking some of the big developments in 20th century physics and is gonna give a new take on them, I guess.

And interesting to tie to this change is good, change is bad, progressivism versus conservativism

lots of ways to read it but that's what bucky wrote 15. boltzmann's concept was analogous to that upon which was developed the theory and practice of the 20th century meteorological weather forecasting which recognizes that our terrestrial atmospheres plurality of high pressure areas are progressively are being progressively exhausted at different rates by a plurality of neighboring low pressure areas

which accumulate atmospheric molecules and energy until they in turn become new high pressure areas, which are next to be progressively exhausted by other newly initiated low pressure areas.

The interpatterning of the various importing exporting centers always changes kaleidoscopically because of varying speeds of moisture formation or precipitation speeds in direction of travel and local thermal conditions.

So cool to think about in the weather

rainstorm case but also in the metaphysical like idea precipitation case also on here this idea that change is going to be abnormal and that the graph you know has the flat line for zero then we want the gdp to be above uh zero or we want it to be in a certain range um instead of

one way to read this idea of change being bad is that when our um preference or our expectation is linear then non-linearities are worrying but because of a not there's non-linearities in nature so we want to have a model that expects closer to how things actually will develop because then we'll be less surprised we'll be able to have better control so back to 16.

Though they did not say it that way, the 20th century leaders of scientific thinking inferred that physical universe is apparently eternally regenerative.

Einstein assumed hypothetically that energies given off omnidirectionally with the ever-increasing disorder of entropy by all the stars were being antientropically imported, sorted, and accumulated in various other elsewheres.

He showed that when radiant energy interferes with itself, it can tie itself precessionally into local and orderly knots.

Einstein must have noted that on Earth, children do not disintegrate entropically, but multiply their hydrocarbon molecules in an orderly fashion.

Little saplings grow in an orderly way to become big trees.

Einstein assumed Earthian biology to be reverse entropy.

This account, in parentheses, this account does not presume to recapitulate the actual thought processes of Einstein at any given point in the development of his philosophy.

Rather, it attempts to illustrate some of the inevitable conclusions that derive from his premises.

So this is awesome.

This kind of Bucky disclaimer saying, yeah, this is not a historical fiction or allegory or parable given an unpacking of some distillation.

It's just an interesting way to

tell history and provide sense-making about what ideas were held by what people, when, and why.

And then 18, what made it difficult for scientists, cosmologists, and cosmogenists to comprehend about Boltzmann's concept or Einstein's implicit espousal of it was the inherent discontinuity of energy events implicit in the photon as closed system package of energy.

What happened to the energy when it disappeared?

For disappear it did.

How could it reappear elsewhere in a discontinuous system?

So this section really ties onto a lot of ideas in synergetics related to like this radical discreteness and finiteness and inactive and embodied-ness to theory.

um the discreteness and the finiteness arises because there's nothing that's infinitely small and there's nothing that's infinitely big especially when we're talking about just system which is always specifically defined so that's why there's so much emphasis on minimal space and closing system because any real event has to actually enclose space

There's this idea of simultaneous order arising from and becoming and unbecoming with disorder and ways that local areas of organization

are sort of like a Turing reaction diffusion machine, or like some sort of other inference network, like some sort of reactive Forney factor graph, that these areas are just sharing information, message passing, or source sync in ecology, and that order or metacommunity dynamics or overall patterns are arising from that relationship.

and that's this idea of the multiple nested or fractal layers of import-export dynamics again informational or thermal and then of all the possible exchange schemes for these nested areas whether they're continuous or discrete there's

the question about how how are the specific parameters for the subset of these systems that's regenerative and sustainable diversifying resilient and anti-entropic or negentropic like basically a living system and this tradition goes back a long time but it goes back to schrodinger's 1944 pamphlet what is life the physicist's approach to the subject with an epilogue on determinism and free will

So what Schrodinger kind of asks in this question oriented paper, what is life?

and comes to these two um really important principles which is the locally negantropic so locally organizing uh or resisting dissipation and therefore um entailings some like cybernetic and good good regulator and predictive elements that's going a little bit beyond what he mentioned but basically um regardless of how we interpret it from a strategy or game theory perspective there's a local organization occurring and then

there's also this section on the use of a periodic quasi crystal crystals um as part of a physical thermal and informational maintenance scheme this i think uh is not a closed book this whole discussion what is life and how do we measure it and such but one area people could look into if they were interested is this

2018 paper from ramstead badcock and friston answering schrodinger's question of free energy formulation and then some of the papers since 2018 it's just a cool area of literature so i'm going to take those properties that came up on the previous slide and think about how the idea of pre-session which is about forces acting at a 90 degree angle

how those relate to quanta.

So section 935.21.

One quantum of energy always consists of six energy vectors, each being a combined push-pull positive-negative force.

See section 600.

That's why we did 600.

uh through 612 and figure 620.06 12 unique forces six plus and six minus six vectors break into two sets of three each classical engineers assumed that each action had its equal and opposite reaction at 180 degrees but since the discovery of the speed of light and the understanding of non-simultaneity we find that every action has not only a reaction but also a resultant

neither the reaction nor the resultant are angularly opposite in the 180 degree azimuth from the direction of action the equal and opposite of classical engineering meant that both action and reaction occurred in opposite directions in the same straight line in the same geometrical plane but since the recognition of non-simultaneity and the speed of light it has been seen that action reaction and resultant vectors

react omnidirectionally and precessionally at angles other than 180 degrees see figure 511.20 so here's 511.20 one energy event action reaction and resultant one energy as uh demonstrated by the man jumping from the boat his action demonstrates the action reaction resultant of the open-ended triangular spiral

all right so let's make it bigger so here's one way that a person is going to an energy event or a photon jumping between layers or maybe a bit flipping or something like that depending on which way the boats are pointing if the boats are pointing the same direction then

when the person jumps from the other boat this back part is going to be pushed that way and then of this boat it's going to drift this way and so then it ends up with the resultant actually coming back to be moving if they both had motors let's say to be pointing at the same pointing vector as the reaction

And then in this case, when the boat that the person's jumping to is already kind of pre-aligned with the direction of action, in which case the resultant diverges from the reaction.

So the fundamental piece here is that it's not just like billiard balls that are constrained to just operate in a single line or like Newton's cradle that just clips one way or the other.

And then everything changes when it gets out of alignment.

There's multiple geometries for the action-reaction resultant, aka the problem-reaction-solution trio.

So depending on the scenario, the way that two events or two systems interact doesn't have to be linear.

So this is kind of like complexity in chaos theory.

And this might be something we talked about another time, but just to kind of only read the highlighted sections here, there's a...

these two sets of three vectors that are going to make a tetrahedron are likened to the proton and the neutron and so there's there's some other sections that talk about that more but let's just consider them the teams for now so the protons three vector team consists of the action vector the reaction vector and the resultant vector

The neutron's three vector team consists of the action vector, the reaction vector, and the resultant vector.

And these are likened or concorded to some of the different subatomic particles.

Either one of these two teams of three vector events is identified in quantum mechanics as being a half quantum or one half spin or one half Planck's constant.

When two half quanta associate, they produce one unit of quantum, see section 240.65.

These two sets of three vectors each combine to produce the six vector edges of the tetrahedron, which is the minimum structural system of universe.

One quantum of energy thus becomes structurally and systematically conceptual.

See figure 935.23.

One quantum of energy equals one tetrahedron.

Humanist writers and broadcasters take notice that science has regained conceptuality.

Science's intertransformabilities and intercomplementarities are modelably demonstrable.

The centuries-long chasm that has separated science and the humanities has vanished.

So here's the figure showing some subatomic events and just the way that, I guess, mainstream non-synergetics physics frames these different particles or patterns.

And then the way that it's in figure 935.23.

And...

pretty cool how it maps onto the ted but just to kind of continue on that last thought about the humanities and the sciences 24. the tetrahedral model of the quantum as the minimum structural system of universe is

a prime component in producing the conceptual bridge to span the vast chasm identified by C.P.

Snow, as having for so long existed between the 1% of the world, people who are scientists, and the 99% of humanity, comprehendingly communicated with by the writers in literature and the humanities.

This chasm has been inadvertently sustained by the use of an exclusively mathematical language of abstract equations on the part of scientists, thus utterly frustrating the comprehension of the scientists' work by the 99% of humanity that does not communicate mathematically.

This book, Synergetics, contains the conceptualizing adequate to the chasm bridging task, and it does so in vectorially structured geometry and in exclusive low-order prime numbers in rational whole-number accounting.

As an instance of chasm spanning between science and the humanities by conceptually transformative energy quanta accounting, synergetics conceptually elucidates the Boltzmann import-export, entropy-syntropy transaction and the elegant manner in which nature accommodates the hidden ball play of now you see it, now you don't, energy transference.

So...

This is Bucky's take on that CP snow divide that Kirby was talking about earlier or later, depending on how you think about it.

But that's neither here nor there.

He's directly saying that synergetics is the bridge

between these worlds which bucky had a slightly different phrasing on and many different takes existed online and just the way that bucky thinks synergetics is going to relate to building this bridge was related to what kirby said about it's primarily in prose there's more paragraphs in synergetics and graphics

then there are equations there are some kind of mathematical equations and there's some tables with underlying math and there's all this secondary computer science and math that's been developed but the book itself is primarily prose and graphical experiential maybe and he says that synergetics is up to the task through two contributions

and I'm sure these were distilled down, which is that it structures vectors

with geometry so this is vectors like forces and through time dynamics so time and geometry space and it's going to be the space of nature with the close sphere packing and the tetrahedral coordination and the minimum of four making a space enclosing system rather than an xyz minecraft voxel world and then the other half of the contribution is to focus exclusively on low order prime numbers in rational whole number accounting

so the low order primes like one two three five seven et cetera and the rational whole number accounting being no um kind of like infinite decimals or um physical systems that don't come down to specific integer based math and the integer math and the numerology just goes in so many different directions so that's a whole another direction

The indigs and everything.

25 is talking about how the quanta and this idea of there being a minimum packet of energy that comes into existence with all these features like the charge and the spin, but never just one, never just the charge or just the spin.

The way that...

potentially there's mappings in the humanities, like the nature of message passing or of like communication, where how does meaning move between two different entities?

And that's this hidden ballplay of now you see it, now you don't, energy transference.

And so most people don't communicate mathematically.

They want to read a novel or experience a narrative of some technology like a podcast or a movie about a romance or something rather than try to make a mathematical model of romance, which I know there's some people who are totally into.

um and then quantum has kind of proceeded mathematically there hasn't been uh in bucky's opinion enough kind of communication broadly of um some of the fundamental to him exciting developments in physics and what they mean for our perception of reality so then 936 volumetric variability with topological constancy

So topology, the connectedness of things, is going to stay the same, but there's going to be changes in the space enclosing volume.


UNKNOWN:
10.


SPEAKER_00:
Symmetrical and asymmetrical contraction.


UNKNOWN:
11.


SPEAKER_00:
An octahedron consists of 12 vector edges and 2 units of quantum and has a volume of 4 when the tetrahedron is taken as unity.

See table 223.64.

Pulling two ends of a rope in opposite directions makes the rope's girth contract precessionally in a plane 90 degrees to the axis of purposeful tensing, section 1054.61.

Or if we push together the opposite sides of a gelatinous mass or a pneumatic pillow, the gelatinous mass or the pneumatic pillow swells tensively outward in a plane at 90 degrees to the line of our purposeful compressing.

This 90 degree reaction or resultant is characteristic of precession.

So this is connecting the idea of, for example, braided things like a rope.

When they're pulled under tension or pushed under compression, they have a different width.

And even like DNA has A and B DNA and C DNA, all these different isoforms.

So I wonder how that works with DNA. 12.

The octahedron represents the most commonly occurring crystallographic conformation in nature .

It is the most typical association of energy as matter.

It is at the heart of such association.

Any focused emphasis in the gravitational pull of the rest of the universe upon the octahedron's symmetry precesses it into asymmetrical deformation in a plane at 90 degrees to the axis of the exaggerated pulling.

This forces one of the 12 edge vectors of the octahedron to rotate at 90 degrees.

If we think of the octahedron's three XYZ axes and its six vertexes, oriented in such a manner that X is the north pole and X prime is the south pole, the other four vertexes, YZ, Y prime, Z prime, all occur in the plane of and define the octahedron's equator.

The effective gravitational pull upon the octahedron will make one of the four equatorial vectors disengage from its two adjacent equatorial vertices, therefore thereafter to rotate 90 degrees and then rejoin its two ends with the north pole and south pole vertexes.

See figure 936.12, color plate 6.

Here's...

that figure of 936.12 octahedron as conservation and annihilation model if we think of the octahedron as defined by the interconnections of the six closest packed spheres gravitational pull can make one of the four equatorial vectors disengage from its two adjacent equatorial vertexes to rotate 90 degrees and rejoin in the north and south vertexes in the transformation completed as at one

So this is a sort of way that we again draw upon the parallel earlier between the close packing of spheres and the vertex-oriented view.

We could think of it as a tetravert with four energy events.

We could think of it as having six edges or four faces.

Or we could think about the centers of the vertexes being equally separated and therefore equivalent to this kind of close packing.

And that's what motivated the whole desire to use the close packing of spheres as our fundamental coordinate system rather than, again, the Minecraft voxel world.

And what's being shown here is a transformation where when you have the sort of expanded form of the rope, so here it's been pushed or depending on how you think about it, it's been opened up.

And then when there's a compression from one side or the other, there's a change in the packing of the spheres.

And that is gonna be associated with a volumetric change, which we'll...

Here about, so here's the same figure, 13.

When this precessional transformation is complete, we have the same topological inventories of six vertexes, eight exterior triangular faces, and 12 vector edges as we had before in the symmetrical octahedron.

But in the process, the symmetrical four tetrahedra quanta volume octahedron has been transformed into three tetrahedra, three quanta volume, arranged in an arc section of an electromagnetic wave conformation with each of the two end tetrahedra being face bonded to the center tetrahedra.

See section 982.73.

So there's a transformation that puts the higher volume, lower energy configuration

and then transforms it down from the A to down on the bottom right is the transformation is completed.

And then there's, again, there's three tetrahedra that now exist in this transformation.

And so where does the volume go?

14, the precessional effect has been to rearrange the energy vectors themselves in such a way that we have gone from the volume four quanta of the symmetrical octahedron

again that's inscribed inside of a tet so we can still have a tet first view on this octahedron the volume four quanta of the symmetrical octahedron to the volume three quanta of the asymmetric tetra arc array segment of an electromagnetic wave pattern symmetric matter symmetric matter has been entropically transformed into asymmetric and directionally focused radiation one quantum of energy has seemingly disappeared

When the radiation impinges interferingly with any other energy event in universe, precession recurs, and the three-quantum electromagnetic wave re-transforms syntropically into the four-quantum octahedron of energy as matter, and vice versa.

QED.

See figure 936.14.

So QED, what can you really say about that?

And we'll go to the figure in a second.

The octahedron goes from a volume of four to a volume of three as one tensor is precessed at 90 degrees.

This is a demonstration in terms of tension and compression of how energy can disappear and reappear.

The process is reversible, like Boltzmann's law and like the operation of centropy and entropy.

The lost tetrahedron can reappear and become symmetrical in its optimum form as a ball-bearing sphere octahedron.

There are six great circles doubled up in the octahedron.

Compression is radiational.

It reappears.

of the fundamental fourness of all systems we have a model of how four can become three in the octahedron conservation and annihilation model so that's sort of the story arc of the conservation and annihilation is we're going to approach this from a shape of space and prose driven perspective rather than potentially some sort of quantum geometry perspective mathematical topology or something in that genre

so we justified the way that um rope or other structures could be um precessionally uh change in structure related that to the shape space and that was prose driven so here is where we get to the um a figure that kind of is a fun little way to end this

stream because it was just a little bit of a rabbit hole but an interesting discussion and if anyone like has thoughts about what this iceland spar example really means or any other take on it'd be kind of cool to hear so 16 see the iceland spar crystals for the octahedron's double vector edge image

the interior volume of the concave vector equilibrium shape space occurring interiorly between the six uniradius octahedral collection of closest packed spheres is greater than is the concave octahedrally shaped space occurring interiorly between the four uniradial tetrahedral collection of closest packed spheres, which tetrahedral collection

constitutes the minimum structural event in the universe, and its interior space is the minimum interior space producible within the interstices of the closest packed uniradius spheres.

So, figure 936.16, it's a... No, it's not an Andy Warhol painting.

It's the Iceland Spar crystal.

So, this was just like, hmm, what an interesting image.

One line of text on either side, and then two lines of text.

so i started researching a little bit about this iceland spar so this is from the wikipedia article

It's written, it has been speculated that the sunstone, old Norse solarstein, a different mineral from the gem quality sunstone, mentioned in medieval Icelandic texts was Iceland's spar, and that the Vikings used its light polarizing property to tell the direction of the sun on cloudy days for navigational purposes.

The polarization of sunlight in the Arctic can be detected.

and the direction of sun identified to within a few degrees in both cloudy and twilight conditions using the sunstone and the naked eye.

The process involves moving the stone across the visual field to reveal a yellow and top-dick pattern on the fovea of the eye, probably Heidinger's brush.

The recovery of an Icelandic spar sunstone from an Elizabethan ship, which sank in 1592 off of Alderney, suggests that this navigational technology may have persisted after the invention of the magnetic compass.

So that's kind of interesting.

And then looked up this entoptic phenomena.

within and visual are visual effects whose source is within the eye itself.

So there's a bunch of different categories of these.

And then this Heidinger's brush was a fun piece that ties a lot of it together.

So what is this Heidinger's brush?

Also from the Wikipedia.

Many people are able to perceive polarization of light.

just like bees do.

Heidinger's brushes may be seen as a yellowish horizontal bar or bowtie shape with fuzzy ends, hence the name brush, visible in the center of the visual field against the blue sky viewed while facing away from the sun or on any bright background.

It typically occupies three to five degrees of vision, about twice or three times the width of one's thumb held at arm's length.

the direction of light polarization is perpendicular to the yellow bar, i.e.

vertical if the bar is horizontal.

Fainter bluish or purplish areas may be visible between the yellow brushes .

Heidinger's brush may also be seen by looking at a white area on many LCD flat panel computer screens due to the polarization

effect of the display in which case it is often diagonal so not sure how well this is going to come across on the stream but uh pretty pretty interesting um to look at that pattern maybe there's other patterns that people see and then it was citing to this 2021 paper uh seeing polarization of light with a naked eye um o'shea in uh i guess chronobiology and or yeah and they wrote

Many readers may know that scores of animal species sense the polarization of light for purposes including navigation, predation, and communication.

It is commonly thought that humans lack any sensitivity to polarization of light.

We hope to convince you otherwise by describing three examples where humans can detect polarization of light with the naked eye by showing you how to see it yourself and by describing its uses.

So to kind of tie it back to synergetics, what does this Heidinger's brush phenomena show us about human perception?

What about when this sort of perceptive event is confirmed by sensor measurements and designed experiments,

What does the phenomena show us about nature?

What does it mean about the structure of light that it has polarization?

Could there be a world where light doesn't have polarization?

Or why is polarization always and only the states that it is?

Or why is it co-varying?

Or why does it have certain causal implementation or effect on some other system?

Are there only two ways it can be polarized?

And then, again...

thinking about the history and the name of the Iceland spar crystal and some of its reputed uses how and then also kind of tying it back to the modern technology the modern scrying screens and then just it's giving us polarized light the sun is polarized but in a different way and

It's providing information to us, and just because we might not see it, it doesn't mean that it's not influencing us.

And then, what does this all have to do with synergetics?

And there's probably a lot of answers, so it'd be fun if people have thoughts, but one way to think about it is that it's a story and a phenomena that's right at the intersection of our perception, our experiential world,

our cognition and our action and it ties together like kirby outlined the stem and the path like the techie and the fuzzy the physics and the math and the history and the philosophy because again

One of the ideas raised earlier was this tension between the primacy of experience, but then the recognition that experience was just a tiny fraction.

So these phenomena like Heidinger's brush, which can then be experimentally confirmed, for example, maybe people were just aware that this rock could be used a certain way and you'd have a certain sense or a certain site that would help you.

And then when we have the spectrometer, we can measure it hundreds of years later.

But phenomena like this sit right at the twilight zone.

of the informational foraging that actually suggests at the deeper structure of nature so in a way this is sort of a middle path or some sort of problem reaction solution to that dialectic of experience is prime primal and the most important and the only direct apprehension available to us yet it's so partial and it uh in a way relates to

earlier slide from cosmography about us existing at a specifically relevant tuned in level with our generative modeling and our perceptive process with our active inference and then conceptually similarly and then there being just an above and a below that goes beyond our understanding yet has implications for how we act while we can so i hope this was a fun dot 10. uh

The goal was to go over some of the early chapters, just a few random figures in cosmography, but it's a pretty chill book.

give a first pass on transcendentalism and synergetics with a nod towards kirby's awesome blog series and then a quick recap on structure and then from the tet we thought about space packings and the octahedron and the way it could go from a three to four volume and absorb and

emit energy giving a qualitative and a geometric interpretation of quantum or quanta quantum events in a way that comes from the pro side and the aesthetic and the structure and the system side um and is at the very least compatible or hopefully sort of in a leapfrog or jitterbug relationship with other approaches

right thanks for watching i hope this was interesting leave a comment or send a message if you have any suggestions or anything but thanks and bye