SPEAKER_00:
Hello, everyone.

Welcome, and thanks so much for joining the August 2021 Complexity Weekend Heartbeat.

Today it's August 28th, 2021, at least where I am.

We're going to have 25 minutes of an introduction music by Michael Garfield.

Then we'll have an organizer introduction slides, followed by interactive Jamboard session.

So if you're watching live or in replay, thanks again for joining us.

We hope to interact with you soon.

All right, enjoy the Michael Garfield tunes, and we'll see you in just a few minutes.


SPEAKER_03:
Woo-hoo!


UNKNOWN:
Thank you.

so

Wow.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_02:
Can you hear me?

I cannot hear you.

Hi, how are you?


UNKNOWN:
Thank you.

BANG!

Thank you.

Thank you.

so so

Oh my god.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you for watching.


UNKNOWN:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
okay awesome thanks michael uh from the past for that excellent music and welcome to the august 2021 complexity weekend heartbeat i'm daniel and i'm one of the co-organizers for this month along with a team that we'll introduce soon and um michaela while i'm just sort of setting things up and people are joining want to say hello or just how are you doing


SPEAKER_02:
Hello, everybody.

I'm very happy to be with you again.

This is like my third Heartbeat, and I'm very excited to be with the whole team again.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

We'll just walk through it.

And anywhere that you want to add something, Michaela, just raise your hand in Jitsi or just say it out.

And if you're in the live chat, totally ask questions because...

we're just gonna wing it and see where we go.

All right, so in this video, we're gonna first just talk a little bit about Complexity Weekend in general, and also some statistics about this Heartbeat as well as previous cohorts, and we'll go over our purpose, values, and guidelines.

Then we'll talk about the August 2021 Heartbeat event specifically, and the timeline and the program, some of the things that you can look forward to there.

So first, an introduction to Complexity Weekend as a community of practice, because every event, especially Heartbeats, there's always some people who are returning and other people who are joining for the first time.

So both are really welcomed.

Our first Complexity Weekend was in person in San Francisco at 7th and Market.

So here's Sean and a few other of our friends.

And then during the course of planning for the future Complexity Weekends, the game changed a bit.

And so we went online.

And since having online weekend cohorts, we've had three of them, May and October 2020, and May 2021, now planning for the November 2021 weekend.

And we've sort of elaborated and built on that idea and built the set of alumni as well through this time.

Any thoughts on that, Michaela?


SPEAKER_02:
Oh, wait, now you muted.

Sorry, I'm unmuted now.

I think it's really what seems to be occurring.

Get people from other places involved as well.

And you can see the numbers are really jumping.

I don't know what you're planning for November, but I think there's going to be lots of people involved.


SPEAKER_00:
We hope so.

That would be awesome.

Another way to look at complexity weekend is through time in terms of this energy level.

And on the Y-axis, you can think of it as sort of the energy fluctuations or any given person's involvement, whether this is like two hours total or a week, or whether this is like 20 hours total a week, this is sort of a fluctuation in someone's involvement.

And then there's peaks in the cohort and in the pre-weekend leading up to the weekends themselves.

and then there's these informal heartbeat events which are just sort of drop in there's not an asynchronous back end it's just like the live stream and gather that we experience synchronously and then in the background on a totally different time frame can be a totally different set of tools is you and your team just like learning about complexity and hopefully developing what you want to work on if it's research or some other application

And so this, the dates for this are pretty much set for the next many months.

So if you think, oh, wow, I'm just like too busy to go to this heartbeat, but this one I'm going to be available or I'd like to co-organize in six months.

You can actually get that on the calendar and help structure some of your journey, I guess.

Any thoughts there, Michaela?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I've been involved from the beginning of 2021 and I can't get enough of it.

So I come back to almost every heartbeat and I'll actually be co-organizing with you in December as well.

So looking forward to that.


SPEAKER_00:
It feels like it's going to be a world away after a whole other weekend, but it's like, yep, we'll do something like this and maybe have someone else joining us talking and yeah.

Yet another representation is sort of a role-based...

overlapping chart like this, with the biggest circle being participants, because every person who's involved is a participant.

And then facilitation is a role that's played for a specific event.

So like Michaela's happens to be a facilitator for this heartbeat, but then might be a participant in a future one.

And the event organizers are also for a specific event only, and they're kind of also dual registered as either a facilitator or a participant.

And then the two on ramps into being a participant are really these monthly heartbeat events that you're at now, either live or asynchronously, and then the weekend cohorts.

And then the teams

as shown on this slide are kind of inside and on the interface and on the outside of CW and associates and supporters are sort of people within and outside the community who help support it all.

So that's sort of the layout of CW.

Who are we?

Well, this was just some statistics from the May 2021 weekend cohort.

And then we'll show some from this heartbeat.

And of course there's many ways to partition or describe who was there.

And also we don't,

connect it to like activity information.

So we can't say where was the actual activity?

Where are the changes that people made?

That's cool to learn more about in future cohorts, but we just sort of know this is the registration information and about a third from the US and then from a total of about 50 countries.

So the next weekend will be in November and we'll hopefully also have a really global cohort

help make the activity exciting across all time zones.

So at first it's like, wait, but I'm going to miss this 12 hours because I have to go do this other thing and sleep.

But then there's still hours to connect with people who are in other parts of the world.

So I think there's just like a cool format that was working more in this May 2021 than in the previous ones.

But definitely like a question that all kinds of

people in groups are wondering about like do you just do the same session at three times or do you just make it at one time and say sorry to half the world how do you actually plan I don't know what do you think about that or of course from a whatever complexity or biomimicry angle that makes you think about like how do we think about this scheduling and global connectivity um from a biological point of view


SPEAKER_02:
I think it's great because it's opt-in, opt-out.

You can really go whenever you have time or you feel you're in good shape.

On the May court, I just logged in at six in the morning, my time in Europe, and I ended up having a great talk about blockchain and whatever, like at six in the morning on a Sunday, which probably would not happen in other places.

And you could just

pop in to gather and see what's going on.

And you can also schedule a meeting with people and gather.

So times can work for both of you or your group.

And it's quite fascinating to see that there's always a little bit of something going on, even in the dead of night.

So that's...


SPEAKER_00:
And then just a bit of information on this heartbeats registration before addressing a question.

This is the question on the form that said, what describes your level of familiarity with complexity or complexity science, whether on the learning or on the applying side?

And there's no tests or, you know, measuring sticks.

So 1 to 10, what does it really mean?

What if you just know that you know less of it?

So all of that sort of aside, pretty interesting distribution.

And something we've kind of seen.

That there's like a flat distribution between about 1 and 8.

And then a few 9 and 10.

Sometimes with an uncanny valley at 9.

Like other times less at 10.

So just shows that hopefully like whatever you're...

self-perceived which is the most important sense or other perceived value under some legacy or arising way to think about complexity you'll find other people who are just also in a different stage of it working on the same kind of topics so just cool like everyone is on this continuum of somewhere whatever it means um all right natalia's question was

I've always been curious about how this all got started.

Would you like to explain where the idea for CW came from?

A lot of people have been involved since the beginning, but at least relating to the co-organizing of the first event,

I was a co-organizer for the Stanford Complexity Group, and Sean, aka Dr. Proton, was living in the nearby area.

And then we met in person, and he had a lot of experience on this entrepreneurship and the startup weekend and all these other areas that were really...

It was one thing to see interdisciplinary within the academia, but then it's another thing to actually be talking to people who have experience applying or working in complex settings, which are sometimes

theoretical in research.

So that just got us excited.

And then with the initial set of really facilitators and participants in San Francisco, you see some of the very same people like the initial facilitators, Jared and Jason and Zargum and Chen Ling, all still sort of playing roles.

So that just, yeah.

then we just sort of with people who were involved at that time when things changed in 2020 saw this saw some of the other changes online and some of the work like with interactive tools like from monica and others and that really left um kind of marks on how we i guess got to here but that's all to say that just whoever

organizes and facilitates.

If some facilitator invents some novel, you know, Palma with the one-on-one conversations, then that became part of the one-on-ones, but that wasn't included in 2020, but it was just something that Palma's interaction led to.

So probably there's other answers to that too.

Anything to say on that, Michaela?

Or I hope that's a okay answer.


SPEAKER_02:
I guess we know a bit more, uh, from behind the scenes and, uh,

I'm very happy that this will know how it all started.

So thanks for that.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so I'll read it.

And then you can give a thought.

What brings us all together is a shared purpose and interest in complexity science, a desire to have impact on co creative teams and improve our community of practice through feedback, participation and peer mentorship, and then the core values and our desire to develop community.

Cool.

We come together for a reason.

Like people take time out of their day, whether it's the morning or the afternoon or the night, people are deciding to interact synchronously and asynchronously and kind of jump through whatever hoops or deal with whatever weird stuff happens to be involved in whatever it is that they're doing.

So our purpose is that we're learning complexity science by doing.

We're serving through deep time and we include to innovate.

Diversity is key.

Any thoughts on this, Michaela?


SPEAKER_02:
I really, really like the include to innovate because I think that's a key factor to spread the meme of complexity and also to...

kind of gather all these different pockets of the future that are in the present.

People with regenerative thought and a big sense of community can really exchange ideas here and further their thoughts and build up powerful teams, I guess.


SPEAKER_00:
It's sort of like...

a rule or a um a heuristic for collaboration but again just thinking about interdisciplinary well one way of doing that would be keeping the other discipline like at an arm's reach and ha or you could include the other discipline in the project so it's sort of like two modes of interfacing are we going to have a sort of protected interfacing or a participatory way

Or yeah, so that's kind of cool.

All right, the core values that help just guide our understanding and participation are that Complexity Weekend is itself a complex system.

Education is active.

We learn complexity science by doing.

Teamwork makes the dream work.

Participation means accessibility and inclusion for all.

Respect is key and step up and be brave.

Any one that makes you think of anything or no worries?


SPEAKER_02:
Step up and be brave.

Uh, at the beginning I was, I was not even sure that I knew anything about complexity.

So I just thought, you know, let's go and give it a try and registered in a crazy way.

It would be a facilitator, uh, for the first weekend.

And, uh,

The community is really cool and helps you feel included and that whatever you have to bring to the table is valuable and can be a bridge between disciplines and participants.

And I think, yeah, do it.

Step up and try.

It's going to be fine.

People are respectful.

People listen to you and they're here to help you.

So just give it a shot.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

Nicely said.

then how do we uh step up and give it a shot we just follow our guidelines whatever they mean to us and also recognizing them as a evolving document and there's also another document that people can see with more like commentable information but just the sort of tip of the iceberg of that is adopt a complexity thinking mindset

Communication is key.

Relationships as well as teams.

So kind of pairwise and collective relationships.

Embrace technology, but know its limits.

So that implies using good audio visual etiquette and just being patient or taking an extra second to understand that somebody might be calling from mobile or in a lag zone or something.

And we welcome full participation and appreciate everyone's diverse ways of interacting.

So whatever way it's gonna be, you're just gonna listen to audio when you're traveling or you do or don't have a certain amount of time, that's just what it means to participate for you.

and reach out on the edges and stay involved so cool all right so just for a few minutes we'll go over the things that will happen in this heartbeat specifically and then we'll go to a jam board and just kind of for however long work through that and then the rest of the weekend is going to be having activities in gather so it won't be like recorded or live streamed

All right, so first, the August 2021 co-organizer team was Steven, Daniel, Kobus, Sarah, and Natalia.

So that was complexity team for this cycle.

And yeah, big thanks to all of these co-organizers.

It was a fun month.

We met four times.

We were in a key-based team.

We did a little asynchronous work.

We reached out to a few facilitators, some we knew and just jumped on it immediately.

Cough, cough, Michaela.

Others were being brought into Complexity Weekend for the first time through a personal relationship with a co-organizer who can really like make sure the facilitator knows how to use Gather and is able to have their session be kind of as they envision it, even if they're coming in for the first time.

So awesome work to the organizers.

And if you want to organize a future heartbeat, we just have a spreadsheet.

We can put you on a future month and it's hopefully fun.

The facilitators are fourfold.

We have Michaela, professional facilitator, complexity enthusiast, Andre Berlin, Steven Silette, and RJ.

Great, multiple returning facilitators and new facilitators.

So Michaela, I'm just curious, what brought you to facilitate?

What could people look forward to in the session?

How is it different in your evolving use of facilitating?

Like what trends have you seen or enjoyed trying?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, so I always strive for something that is interactive where people can do something hang on.

I will talk about biomimicry, great surprise, and biomimicry's life's principles and how we can use biomimicry to be a key component of conveying complexity and also getting complexity to a wider audience.

So tune in, it's tomorrow.

And I'm trying something a little bit new this time with, I wanted to try something with a video, but that seems to be a little bit on the edge.

So I'm really looking forward to seeing how people interact more on a person to person basis.

We'll see how many people join in and we'll take it from there.

I think, again, you just need to dare and try and

Last time it was a little bit different and I'm gathering more and more assurance that everything's going to be okay and I think the big shift will be in the November weekend.

I'm planning on having a panel discussion, so see who is interested in joining me in seeing how we can communicate complexity to a wider audience by different means.

So hi, reach out to me on Gather or on Keybase, Pelt1, in case you're interested in having a panel discussion for November.


SPEAKER_00:
Sounds very cool.

Just made me wonder about like biomimicry for online event design.

But it's gonna have to be some type of generalized biomimicry because we're not going to see an analog in non-human life.

At least in the ants, you know, we have logistics and Stigma G, all these things, but how do we go into a different zone?

Cool, so good.

Facilitators looking forward to all of their sessions.

One note on Gather.

So this is what the spatial chat platform Gather is going to look like.

Some of you will be very familiar with it.

Others will be on it for the first time.

But Gather, kind of like Complexity, just jump in, you know, figure it out.

If it needs a different browser, we're there.

Email us if you need any help or if something's not working.

But if you stick with it, you'll...

probably figured out.

On the top left are the settings, which can sometimes help if there's some limiting factor with the internet.

Then the two bubbles are chat.

So here it's just an ephemeral chat.

During the weekends, we use Keybase as more of like a threaded chat with channels, but the Keybase chat just sometimes will say, oh, five minutes left in this session.

And then clicking this people tab, you can see who's in the space.

And then you can also click on their name, send them a message or follow them, just run over to them wherever they are.

Clicking on your character on the bottom adjusts your avatar.

And you can also have things on the bottom bar like some more settings, clicking on your name, the mini map, screen share, and emojis, including raising your hand.

And then muting your microphone and turning your video on or off are on the video square.

And you can also like make it bigger size video too.

So that's kind of Gather.

Fun times working in Gather.

And that's where, after this live stream, all of the heartbeat is going to be in Gather.

So we're going to have a jam board in a few minutes, and then we're going to have for half an hour on the live stream, and then go and have the rest of the weekend in Gather.

So the link to the program is in the calendar event in the email, and maybe we can try to post it in the chat, but we're here in the live stream where the slides and the Jamboard link are posted.

Then at 15 after, so in 50 minutes, we'll have a one-on-one session facilitated by Natalia and Sarah.

And that's just going to be chance to have like kind of unstructured one-on-one conversations with other participants.

At 1700 UTC, RJ will have a session project documentation for emergent teams.

Then half an hour later, Andre will have a facilitated session called collaborative innovation and product design.

Then at 1830 UTC, we're going to have spotlight talks.

So whoever is there and would like to give a five-minute or less talk on anything.

It can just be, hey, I want to meet people who are working on this, or it can be, here's my little nano TED talk.

And then at the end of that, we'll adjourn to a poster session, and that's the end of the first interval.

And then tomorrow,

One hour before the official start, you can just hang out and gather.

Other people might be there.

And then at 2100 UTC, we'll start with another one-on-one session.

At 2200 UTC, Michaela will have session described just a little bit earlier on biomimicry and life's principles, tools for communicating in complexity.

2300 UTC, Steven Silette.

getting a handle on your position in life and the systems of interest, maybe, but just cut off in the screenshot, but going to be a cool session.

And then at the stroke of midnight, when complexity turns into a pumpkin, we'll have the spotlight talks and the organizers closing, and then similarly adjourn to posters.

And you can come to any part, drop in or out.

The ways to support Complexity Weekend, other than just participating and being there, your feedback and word of mouth recommendations are the best way for the community to grow.

So that's just usually the most helpful, just bringing a friend to an event or sharing the RSVP link.

If you're enjoying your experience, you can support us through PayPal and we'll have some future affordances on other fronts as we develop better on that side.

And the contributions basically go towards

funding future events.

So the main costs here at this point are the costs for registering Gather to make sure it has capacity, and then the honorariums for facilitators, which are like opt-in, and that's not like an evaluation of facilitator value, but just helps respect the facilitator's time.

And it just, that's what we spend our money on now.

But in the future, we would consider developing new kind of programs or micro grants for teams.

That'd be pretty cool.

Okay, so we'll move to the Jamboard, which I just put the link in the chat, but just to describe Jamboard, this post-it note shape is how you add a post-it note.

And you can also add a text box and you can play with other tools.

So we're going to go to a Jamboard and

just walk through some questions so you can open it up and just let me know if it doesn't open for any reason.

So while I resize this window, Michaela, what, just anything random or anything that you've been working on or thinking about?


SPEAKER_02:
I'm having an inception problem between the Jamboard and you.

No, all good.

Fantastic.

Thanks for this introduction and looking forward to joining you on the Jamboard.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

All right.

So we can go to the second slide.

and it asks, what is your intention today?

So it could be a draft.

You can go first or I'll go first.

Okay, I think you'll go through Jamboard.

I think this is just a cool heartbeat because we had a lot of facilitators kind of lined up from the very beginning and that allowed us to think about other pieces.

And so my intention is just to chill, enjoy the one-on-ones and just have a cool August weekend.

Getting to meet new people and have fun in Complexity.

Is that yours, Mikayla?


SPEAKER_02:
It is.

Yes.


SPEAKER_00:
This slide just always makes me wonder about, well, what is the relationship between intention and anything like our action, but also just intention and complexity?

Or is it just that intention is outside of complexity and then we're using it just as a kind of personal behavior trick to focus in on something that's important to us?

Or can we take a complexity view on intention itself?

Cool, to become part of this community of practice.

Nice start with an orange Jamboard post.

Discover new models.

Also cool.

That kind of reminds me of some...

recent work with um rj and others but something that everyone probably experiences in their own domain is just how does one stay on top of the kind of cutting edge of their own field or even sub area how do we discover like models that are

about the same topic or you know it could be a mathematical model or a programming model or a conceptual model or workflow or something but there's sort of like this local exploration to be aware of what's happening in one's own area but then also to pull back and then see that there's models again of all those different kinds in other fields but then

It's unlikely if you're not on projects together, if you're not in the same literature or areas of searching for information, then sometimes those frameworks don't transfer or different language.

Cool.

Learn new aspects of complexity, perhaps teach some too.

Build bridges between disciplines.

This is kind of like, because there's some words that might...

co-occur closely with some senses of complexity, like chaos, fractal, phase transition, like that non-linear dynamics side of complexity.

For other people, it's very computational.

For other people, it's going to be ecological and relational.

So there's so much to learn on each of those areas, I think.

Okay, nice, let's go to three.

Okay, so, awesome, good.

All right, thanks for going to three.

So, who are you and how did you discover Complexity?

We discovered complexity via books and the SFI, so probably Santa Fe Institute, through Complexity Weekend.

Cool.

So inside and outside.

And so this, on all the complexity and X, sort of that style of project,

whether it's a paper or a startup idea, they always kind of represent like these sort of two streams of some who are drawn for that.

It's like complexity and robotics.

And some people just see the robotics and then it's an introduction to complexity.

And then there's also this broader set of people who will come for the complexity and then be exposed to the challenges in robotics or some cool work that somebody is working on.

So,

It's just often like we're brought in.

Maybe this relates to what you were mentioning about how to communicate it.

Like at some point, somebody is going to have to bring up the word complexity or do they?

You know, some interesting stuff.

What do you think about that?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, I think it's it's.

very often people deal with complexity without knowing the name.

They will say it's a complicated problem or it's a wicked problem or I don't know.

And then all of a sudden you realize that there is a whole school of thought and discipline and community of practice behind it that you were maybe not aware of.

And that's how I discovered complexity.

I was basically applying complexity thinking without having the framework for it.

A little bit like

intuitively and now i have more models and more ways of looking at it and also people i can bump questions at and you know further my my knowledge and also the application of complexity in different disciplines or situations so i think it's it's really cool to realize that on on the last weekend in may i bumped into a few people who said like i finally found my family

I thought I was weird.

And now there's all these other weirdos that like complexity and they're all around me.

So they were really happy to have found a place where they can geek out with complexity.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

It's really interesting how you started by saying it's about solving wicked problems or the problems that somebody might refer to as complicated or otherwise.

It's a very pragmatic approach.

description of what complexity is.

It's about solving problems.

And that is almost that bridge between the learning and applying, not to foreshadow, but it's like when there's nonlinear data analysis techniques, it is problem solving.

It's solving the problems that are, it's the gap between the models that existed for linear data and the need to model nonlinear data.

So that is problem solving.

It's just conceptual problem solving.

But problem solving actually pulls back to kind of a framing that everyone is experiencing, which is like whatever kind of complexity it is, whatever part of the logistics chain they're in, the complex systems framing helps them negotiate the social side, the physical movement side.

It's just very interesting, again, how you just kind of like started with it being about problem solving rather than about the system behaving a certain way.

But thanks for all these answers and anyone else can add more.

So another Steven Strogatz and SFI.

So nice.

That's a really interesting books that Strogatz has written.

I think this book Sync recently and a few other ones, but

Brijav Kapra's superb course, Kapra Course.

And because I've been unhappy with productionism but had not put a name to it, just looking for a new paradigm.

So that is sort of intertwined with solving problems differently or asking different questions is like what might be referred to as paradigm shift in some sort of fractal way.

Like some aspect of at least someone's mind is being changed.

whether it registers alongside any other historical event or tradition is sort of for the future to debate.

But within a person's own understanding, definitely complexity can be like a paradigm change, so to speak, because they're looking at the same sensory input, but they're having a new way of framing what's happening.

Even if the framing of what's happening is just like, well, it's complex.

Maybe there's someone who's studying like fluid flow and then they kind of tell you and it's like, whoa, there's all these like simulation methods for fluids and they're roiling around and all that.

And then you see the rain coming off the roof and it's just, okay, some interesting stuff happening there.

So it's not always like it takes things that are ambiguous and clarifies them.

So that's why it's one of the reasons why it's fun, I think, because it just opens up a lot of questions about how to relate different systems and influence them rather than just giving a descriptive account or, yeah.

What do you think about that, Michaela?


SPEAKER_02:
I think it also gives you tools, models, tools, and resources in the participants, the facilitators, the organizers will try to channel you to the right place to find the information you're looking for.

So I think also the community is very important in order to like guide you in, in this complex system.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, wait, I'm back.

Right.

um okay you can hear me michaela welcome back oh yeah i can hear okay i'm gonna funny funny camera setups that's why it looked like it was in a very different zone okay let's go to the fourth um slide so complexity learning and applying

And here they're on just sort of an arrow.

Anyone can also edit the geometry if they want.

But how do we think about this learning and applying learning by doing or research and development or application?

How do we think about these multiple sides of complexity?

I'll give a thought or you can go for it.


SPEAKER_02:
I wonder why you're dichotomizing learning and applying.

I think you learn by applying and you also teach by applying, so I think it's not a linear, it's not a tension, it's complex, I guess.


SPEAKER_00:
it's it's more intertwined uh i think you you teach and learn best by applying trying to apply at least so i'd say it's central to to be in the middle of everything okay my other one left it's we're still okay good all right thank you don't need to because now you're on the jam board so you can see it all right yeah um well said uh

I think what is learning?

It's not the inscribing on an empty tablet.

It's something that's happening inside of the person and about their external surroundings, which are social and the products that they've created, projects that they've been a part of.

So how does that get developed?

And yeah, maybe learning and applying are more like sort of two

two legs more walking in tandem than just like two independent skill sets.

And also it made me think of like chemistry.

Like if someone said, well, yeah, there's probably theoretical chemists and they probably use computers and math and physics.

And then there's, of course, a whole range of people working with chemistry.

Their job title might be chemist and might be like, oh yeah, I guess there's thousands of people who are making, you know, vitamin C and stuff.

Or they might just be working with chemistry informally, like dyeing fabrics or any other number of things.

And so chemists,

Complexity, of course, can have the same type of continuum from people who are really interested in fundamental questions or abstract or computational ones, as well as just people who are deploying it by any name.

So feedback on each other.

Learning, teaching, and applying are all intertwined and bump off each other.

Applying.

with strong feedback loops with learning research-based applying so independent of who wrote that what is like research-based applying what does that mean to you i have no clue it kind of made me think you know evidence-based medicine um of course


SPEAKER_02:
I was thinking of your chemistry analogy and I thought, you know, everybody's applying chemistry every day because everybody's cooking.

But that's the basic application.

Also learn and teach and apply and out and fail and start again and burn.

And yeah, I think complexity is just like cooking.

You just, you know,

Again, go for it and try it out.

And sometimes it tastes good and sometimes it doesn't.

So you try again.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, that's how I felt learning biochemistry.

It was like, the cells are doing it.

It's already an ongoing thing.

But the research-based applying, there's probably a few ways that that could be

like unpacked or or meant but on one hand it's like applying research

in practice so somebody makes a lighter material it's about okay how are we going to work with the current state of technology so that that material goes from being like a one-time lab synthesis to something that's affordable and improves people's lives so that's like applying research but then there's also this question of what what might it look like if application

were research driven like research on participatory teams or research on healthy ways to communicate so if research guided application regardless of what that were perceived to be so that's definitely an interesting phrase sensory aware experiences what do you think about that


SPEAKER_02:
I think we learn all the time by just living.

We learn that when we touch something, there's like a feedback to your brain, and then you can derive more.

uh complex systems will maybe all have common denominators and and and that is something that is basically creating mental models and then maybe even disciplines or or theories or uh things that you can then abstract and try to teach again and so we don't have to to experience everything somebody teaches you don't touch something that's hot

even though everybody will do it once in a while to just check if hot is really painful.

These models can advance your knowledge by having abstracted it from experience.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Let's go to slide five in the top bar.

And then I just added the sensory learning experiences because that was a really interesting description you had there.

And it was like,

on that learning by applying, you know, if our example, if our target domain is like woodworking and there's basic woodworking research and then there's the hands-on, how does the conceptual ideas kind of diffuse to both ends?

And then how does the sensory learning also extend to both ends?

And one interesting thing that

I heard during a talk in these past few weeks by Bert de Vries, who's a researcher in robotics.

He was describing about the design cycle and about how it's about the life cycle of the model computationally that's deployed.

So some questions that might be like, well, what if the model doesn't capture

some structures of reality is like by embedding it with this craft and the feedback and the information that was being gathered

it just kind of made the model almost like the backbone and then there was still this living component around it versus this idea that there would be something that's just like purely deployed computationally and then it just like is always able to cope with like novel and unprecedented kinds of novelty which would be an amazing computer toy but even then at some level we still might want to embed it with something that was living

So something we're curious to wonder about.

Patterns that apply across different systems, different fields.

And how can we create communication that encompasses all aspects of complexity?

Almost related questions.

Because like if a word or a driving theme speaks to different fields,

And also the idea of fields like research or fields of practice, I mean, it's one partitioning of the world.

So it could also be in, you know, in different, from different perspectives or something like that as well.

How can the communication speak clearly and not just be vague, which a lot of complexity and systems books and papers like they can do.

And it's an easy slippery slope, right?

And so how do we communicate clearly about also negative space, like a space for somebody to participate, a space for research to be performed or for a project to be deployed in the unknown?

So there's a lot of awesome questions there.

The life cycles of teams and projects, sensory awareness, Taika Metsa on Cubase.

So that's kind of cool because it's like,

the sensory learning, and then there's the sensory awareness.

Because if you were unaware, if there was some touching on your hand that was associated with learning, but then your hand were numb, you wouldn't be able to learn that way, at least unless it was subconsciously transmitting or in some other way.

So it's like our capacity for the sensory learning is related to our sensory awareness.

What are the best acupuncture points to change a complex system?

Awesome question.

How can we design actions, interventions in a complex adaptive system?

So these two, they almost relate to like the patterns across different systems.

Like one says complex system, one says complex adaptive system.

We hear both framings all the time and people can see that they're mapping onto similar thought and the acupuncture point model versus actions and interventions.

It's sort of like if that person were coming from an acupuncture practice, it's like, it's the same.

What are the best chiseling points?

would know that we weren't necessarily talking about just rock but maybe it would apply to rock as well so or leverage points it's not a real lever but of course the leverage points model has been very helpful for a lot of people in thinking about applying systems thinking let's go to um number seven

what kinds of participant behaviors and norms can help us make complexity weekend an amazing space so we have a pro and a con just individuals you know anonymous perspectives but like what are behaviors or moods that we want to see happen than things that we don't want to see be respectful

Things you want to avoid, teaching down, totally agree.

I feel like one piece there is like shorter,

um bites and then allows for more rapid feedback with whether somebody is understanding the sub pieces because um multi-partite arguments or threads or areas of thought that someone might be unfamiliar with um can be hard to follow in one

um expose but then on the other hand again it can be over explaining like overwhelming with details or making assumptions about what somebody does or doesn't know or about what what they have or haven't read um things we want to see bite-sized concepts reaching out to include everyone

Setting reasonable expectations.

This is the hyper prior, the Bayesian hyper prior.

We want to be reasonable about what we expect to be reasonable.

So here's to connect the bite-sized concepts with the reaching out to include everyone.

It makes me think of kind of like a staple.

Like if you're going to be bringing up one concept,

then connecting one abstract piece to one applied piece is like one kind of minimal bite it's like you know jason and friends are working on this quantum thing because this is how it's gonna apply and then also there's like the interpersonal staple like yeah i've read this but have you read anything on that frontier or like what is that

relate to in your area so then it actually like also can connect an idea with a person hopefully respectfully optimal surprise um fun cool yeah these are they are fun um heavy jargon yep like

post the link in the chat, put the link in the chat, and then just, oh, by the way, this term that I'm using, that's what I mean here, or that could be helpful.

Artworks, nice, cool.

This is a little collective artwork there.

It's a font play.

Let's go to eight.

So community support.

Here on one side, it says I can give.

And so you can just put information if you want or meet me and gather at this point in space and time.

And then what people are looking for.

so one question that we have so for the november um weekend we just started getting facilitator rsps so if anybody wants to facilitate they definitely should let us know and michaela um you know rcp'd so thanks for that and one thing that we hope to be that we asked on that facilitator rsvp form but then eventually it might be um

something kind of interesting would be getting, well, first off, having a better system so that people don't have to fill out the same forms again and again.

So then someone can just say, oh, just opt me into this event, add you to a calendar event instead of a full form.

But then we can ask like, what, what,

Do you want to be known that you want to provide and then what are you looking for and then we'd hope for a way to either in one on ones or in small groups kind of.

develop a peer mentorship and sort of.

collaborative spirit.

So.

That's to say, if people want to be a facilitator for November 2021 cohort, they should let us know by the middle of September.

So I can give, communicate complex concepts in natural metaphor.

Peltz1, yes, you can.

Doing it now.

Thinking in terms of pattern models that apply across different fields.

Cool.

A good prior to have about many people.

i'm looking for topological data analysis but what's the point uh i'm looking for and then okay another one from kayla people who wish to participate in the panel discussion in november on building bridges between disciplines that sounds really interesting what were you like seeing with that or what would you want to get out of such an event


SPEAKER_02:
The idea is to build bridges across disciplines and to find common ground in order to maybe communicate to the outside world that complexity is one field.

legs but that we can have a minimal consensus on some terminology and maybe easy metaphors to bring it out to the wider public.

We had some discussions in May with Jen with archaeology as well and maybe you know we can try to make it

simpler and less, less arduous to, to, to, to understand because people are a bit put off by the word complexity, I think, because it's, Oh, it's going to be complicated.

It's going to be complex and it's going to be fractal and it's going to be, Oh, I can't wrap my head around it.

And maybe by finding a few, uh,

easy ways, articulate ways of conveying complexity and show people that complexity is for everyone.

That would be my wish for November.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Well, you could be drawing on participants as well.

That would be a cool mechanism.

bring those panelists in as participants.

And it's like, this isn't the facilitators on the stage.

This is about these people who were all side by side on this project.

All right, let's go to... So for the team member stuff, we're actually going to feature that a little bit in Gather, like during spotlight talks, but you can also check this Jamboard asynchronously.

But let's just go to slide 11 as our last slide to interact on.

How can complexity have impact in real world systems?

How have you successfully applied complexity or where do we see it needing to be applied?

And then there's a few like different kinds of systems that people care about observing like nature and the sharks and the fishies, cities, ants, brains, neurons, markets, real-time data.

So complexity can have impact as a tool to understand wicked problems.

So that was, yeah, like what we were talking about a little bit earlier.

It's like, it's one of the main doorways and attractors for many people is like,

who see their work as being related to problem solving, whether it's a diagnosis or a research question or just like some customer support wicked problem.

There's a community of people working in different ways with a totally different set of tools with like 30 years more or less experience than you.

who have been thinking about it for a long time and also reading some texts that are relevant but by no means comprehensive or like the one-stop like for joff capra like a lot of his books and in that sort of 60s 70s 80s quark and the jaguar chaos there's a lot of books that are sort of

within one cultural thread of complexity but those are english books from a 20 to 30 year period so there's something much bigger and different happening as well and so that's why it's cool that you always bring it back to that like communicating across domains um as a framework for otherwise as a framework for thinking otherwise paradigm shift

As a moving, changing framework to build agile strategy and decision-making.

So then creating a common language between fields, accelerating science by skipping the need for rediscoveries.

Yes.


SPEAKER_02:
I love it.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, that's nice.

And it looks nice with a big font.

Yeah, this orange one kind of,

reminds me of a lot of the people who come from like organizational design or management areas related or business or entrepreneurship.

It was like in all those budget meetings, all those HR, we never heard complexity.

And it's not that we needed the word, but we never heard about feedback loops or about initial conditions or just some of this

these ideas that are more fluidly shared with complexity people.

So there's definitely a lot of people who are within this decision making or like all these work frameworks, business type frameworks that see the relationship between resilience and inclusive teams and complexity, as well as this angle, which is like increasing

guess the ability to accelerate science like to accelerate research products but that's cool um so we can just give another you know minute if anyone wants to add one here but also something that'll be cool will be for the november weekend we'll have a wiki and so that will make it a lot easier to

have a list of like ongoing, like what are the three areas where it is and isn't working according to this person or a community curated list or which projects have arisen out of which complexity weekends for what purpose or where are those projects now?

That will be a lot easier when we have our own kind of wiki system.

So improve coordination in this changing nature of work and life.

and making sense of communication overload.

What do you think about either of those two, Michaela?


SPEAKER_02:
I think it's very interesting that we're

we're kind of moving in two directions.

One is coordinating and creating common language and building bridges and unifying the field.

And the other one is applying it.

So I think it's very interesting that we're on these both tracks, which is maybe one that's more abstract and one that's more hands-on.

And I think it goes with the community that

We have theoretical complex gurus, and we have applied complexity people around.

So it really reflects the community, I think.

Cool.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

OK.

Well, anyone's welcome to continue editing the Jamboard.

We always just kind of look at this slide from Monica Kang, who

here and elsewhere gives great tips on this kind of online collaboration but just reminding us to like use active listening be curious and open assuming kindness playing to our strengths and over communicating and of course people can add more thoughts here all right thanks for watching this live stream michaela amazing great times glad that we could do this together this was really fun

And we will meet at 15 after the hour, so in 12 or 11 minutes from now.

And we'll have a 45-minute one-on-one meeting.

session just starting right then so feel free to take a quick break and then we'll meet you in the gather atrium and just let us know if you don't have a link or anything by email but it should be in the calendar event and in your email so thanks again michaela thanks to all the co-organizers really looking forward to the weekend peace thanks to you excellent talk to you soon bye