SPEAKER_00:
Hello and welcome everyone.

It is December 3rd, 2020.

This will be a Davis Complexity Group webinar with Andy Lomas entitled Morphogenic Creations.

We're really looking forward to it and it's going to start in 25 minutes.

So until then, here is some awesome complexity music by Michael Garfield.

And there's details on the sides of this image.

if you want to learn more about michael's music so michael let's hear your music video and the rest of you will look forward to seeing you in a couple of minutes for andy's talk


SPEAKER_03:
Woo-hoo!


UNKNOWN:
Thank you.

Oh.

Thank you.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you.


UNKNOWN:
Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.


UNKNOWN:
Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
Hello, everyone.

Thanks for coming out to the complexity event that we are having at Davis Complexity Group.

This is Daniel Friedman, and I am very pleased to be introducing our speaker, Andy Lomas.

Andy Lomas is a computational artist, mathematician and Emmy Award winning supervisor of computer generated effects.

His artwork explores how complex structural forms can be created emergently by simulating growth processes.

So certainly at the intersection of art and science.

Currently, he is based in London.

So it's awesome to have an international complexity group speaker where he is developing his art practice as well as a lecturer in creative computing at Goldsmiths University of London.

So thanks again, Andy, for coming to speak for our group.

We're really looking forward to your talk.

And please just take it away.

Hi, I actually do not hear you yet, Andy.

Maybe reload.

Can you hear me, Daniel?

Sounds good now.

This is the fun, is it not, of online events?

So while Andy is reloading, we will just be getting ready for the next part.

Great.


SPEAKER_03:
Can you hear me?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, I can hear you, Andy.

So go ahead and share your screen and just go ahead.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, cool.

Thanks, Daniel.

Okay, so let's share my entire screen.

So, okay.

So can you see my screen now?


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

I can see the Jitsi window and then that is perfect.

Thank you very much.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, great.

All right.

Thanks, Daniel.

Thanks for the introduction.

So, yeah, I guess it's a real pleasure being here today.

And I guess what I'm going to be talking about, I guess, is my out practice, I guess, and how it relates to complexity and basically how I'm using sort of complex systems.

What's the background behind it?

What's the challenge, I guess, of using things like sort of complexity for a creative intent, almost like how I'm trying to address that problem, almost like how to actually work with these often quite unruly, hopefully really rich, interesting, emergent systems, but how to actually work with them creatively, almost like as a human, how do I actually work with this sort of material?

So I hope it's going to be sort of interesting talk and I'm looking forward to hopefully discussion and questions that you may have.

So to give you, I guess, a bit of a background, I guess the real core of my work and what really motivates me probably isn't complexity itself, but it's almost just ideas of this as being the sort of material that life uses, the sorts of things that nature uses.

as being sort of complex systems with lots of interconnected parts of different chemicals that react with each other or neurons that trigger each other.

Or I guess the thing that most of my artwork has been sort of focused on is, I guess, morphogenesis, the idea of creating a rich, what's basically a complex system, creating forms.

So I guess what you have is these rich systems, but the other sort of critical function of that system, something that's almost like how do we make sure that the system isn't just doing sort of crazy stuff or isn't just out of control, but actually is being harnessed, which in nature is sort of happening virtually creatively.

It's like how do we...

work with the systems which you know often actually these sort of complex systems actually don't do anything or they just go completely out of control and often it's you know just you know there's a transitional behavior where the really interesting stuff starts to happen so how do we almost like find that sort of behavior and on the whole and then how do we find which what's potentially the most interesting creatively

or, you know, things that I'm, you know, I want to direct it towards, but not over direct it, and was an artist.

So essentially, what is this medium like to work with?

And how can I actually work with it creatively, I guess, is almost like the real sort of like core questions that I'm, you know, trying to work with in my practice.

So to give you sort of an example, this is showing sort of one of the works that I did a few years ago, about seven years ago, called Cellular Forms.

And what this is basically showing is

a number of different animations

simplified model of cellular growth, actually just running on the GPU.

And basically, every simulation starts with a ball of 42 cells.

And then there are rules for how cells divide.

So things like light rays coming in from outside hit cells, and that allows the cells to generate food.

And then there's rules for things like, does that cell keep all the food itself?

Almost like, is it really selfish?

Or does it share that food with its neighbors, almost be more cooperative?

And then, you know, it's the what forces does each cell exert on the cells around it?

And when a cell splits, which direction does it split in?

You know, does it split in just a random direction or a direction that's, you know, where there's maybe most tension in the surface or where there's most curvature or least curvature?

Or maybe there's external forces and directions that can affect, you know, the direction of splitting.

So there's basically almost like a sort of mixture of all those types of ingredients in the system.

And what I'm interested in is almost like having enough ingredients to hopefully create a rich range of different behaviors and forms and structures, which is hopefully what you're seeing here, that basically this is all the basic, the same simulation system, but just by different strengths and of different influences, different parameters of the system.

you often get like, you know, really surprisingly different sort of structures being created.

Actually, all these simulations actually are saying they start at 42 cells.

These are running to about 50 million cells by the end of the simulation, which is going to, another thing I'm interested in is almost like aesthetically getting to a level of detail and complexity, which I think is almost meaningful to us.

where we start reading things in it, but instead of just being almost looking just like a ball of chemical cells, it starts reading as something of a quite maybe ornate organic complexity.

I guess I'm also working almost like then sort of sampling this by almost like working with growing plants or growing seedlings.

So I'm generally first of all generating a lot of examples of things to quite a low resolution, about a million cells.

And then from those, I'm seeing ones that look like they might have some potential to be interesting.

And, you know, so basically I'm sort of rating and categorizing the sort of like things at the seedling level.

And then I can do things like, you know, a seedling that I think is particularly interesting, I could then create a number of mutants around it, or I could crossbreed it with a number of other cells, other sort of seedlings.

So it's almost like sort of like a plant breeding sort of process of trying to sort of navigate that space of possibilities to hopefully start to find interesting sort of forms and structures.

So I guess that's to give you a little bit more sort of detail.

So what have we got in all those simulations?

So basically it's a sheet of cells that's effectively creating the structure.

So basically there's these treats of triangles of cells connecting triangles, where like in this diagram, the black dots are the cells and the edges are basically links between the cells.

It's saying that each cell is directly linked to a small number of other cells sort of like immediately around it.

Then we have rules for cell division, so that basically after a cell has got enough food, the food level exceeds a certain threshold, then that cell is selected to be divided into two cells.

And we do this by choosing a plane of cleavage, so almost like choosing two edges, which is where the split is going to happen.

and then deleting all the edges to one side of that edge, creating a daughter cell, I guess pushing the parents and the daughter cell a little bit away from each other, and then reconnecting the daughter cell back into the mesh.

So basically what we end up with is, we start with a mesh of triangles, what we end up with is still a mesh of triangles, but now with an additional cell added into the structure.

and has hopefully you can sort of see it's like it's an incredibly simplified version of uh sort of a biology and it's sort of like it's really plain you know i'm amazingly simplified you know instead of all the things on biology like you know cells then different types of cells being created and cells walking off into and finding where they should locate themselves and things like that this is like saying it's astonishingly simple model that's going to say one thing i'm not interested in is how simple could the model

but yet hopefully still create surprisingly sort of rich results.

So then the other thing I have in here is that I see a set of influences as the other cells around it.

So firstly, just like a set of almost like spring forces so that each cell tries to maintain a rest distance from the other cells that it's directly connected to.

So if the cells are too close to each other, they sort of push themselves apart.

If they're further apart than the rest distance, they'll try to pull each other, pull back towards each other.

Then the next thing I've got is another sort of two influences, which basically almost like try to make the surface either bulge or sort of smooth out.

And I guess this is sort of informed, I guess I come from a computer graphics sort of background.

And this is informed by, there's quite a lot of work back in the 90s

he's on cloth simulations and what they found was that if you just have straight stem source springs in the stress in a mesh what you end up with is a limited set of things it basically almost only acts like stiff rubber come chain mail if you want to get more rich sort of like you know folding

what you need to do is almost like things that actively make the surface fold or try to keep itself smooth.

So this is trying to be informed by that, by having firstly an influence where if the cells are closer to each other than rest distance, so that basically the sheet is in compression,

then the cells deliberately try to bulge outwards.

So basically what we do is we calculate, we have normals to the surface, almost like vectors pointing straight out from the surface.

And what we do is work out where would the cell have to move to in order to get back to rest distance if it was having to slide along the normal.

And we work that out for all the cells around and just almost like a bit of an average.

And that's almost like something that the cell tries to move towards that sort of bulging position.

And then secondly, it's almost like a thing that's going the opposite direction.

It basically just says if the cell tries to move back towards the average of the cells connected around it.

So that's an influence that tends to smooth things back out.

And if you just think about it, these are almost like working against each other.

And that's the sort of thing I'm often interested in, is almost like ingredients in these sorts of systems.

And there'd be different weights for almost like how smoothing sort of influence.

So you can almost imagine that if I had a system set up with a bold influence being really strong and a planar one being really weak, what you might have is a sys setup where it almost wants to wrinkle and fold like that.

Whereas if the planar smoothing influence was much stronger, maybe this system would want to keep itself much flatter so that you end up with things maybe more like sort of bubbles and sort of balloon-like sort of structures.

So it's almost like by hopefully just trying to get a good interesting mix of ingredients that are going to have a number of different behaviors.

And then the final influence I've got in here is what of course is a repulsion influence.

So this is almost like a really small, almost like electrostatic repulsion between the cells.

So what I'm showing here, hopefully you can see the animation over the link, is basically two simulations, but with exactly the same parameters for all the influences, apart from the one on the left.

we've got this almost like electrostatic repulsion, whereas on the right, there isn't any.

This is basically the idea is as the cells fold in 3D space and come close to each other, so cells which are distant in the sheet, but in 3D space come close to each other, they just have a small repulsion, a bit like static electricity pushing the cells apart.

And with that, what we end up with is potentially much more rich, interesting structures.

Whereas without it, there's a tendency for this to just go out of control and just like cells pass straight through each other and it all sort of ruts influence that hopefully...

means it's more likely to get something that's sort of structurally coherent, sort of meaningful sort of structure.

So this is then sort of implemented just in C++ and CUDA, which is obviously a language to allow processing on the graphics card, which is great for doing millions of processes all in sort of parallel with each other.

So what you're hearing is something like in real time, there's like a triangle mesh being created and different parts growing at different rates and you're ending up with a sort of like a structure being formed.

I guess I can generally create about a million cell structure in about a minute or two.

So it's like, you know, hopefully in a few hours I can have like a few hundred seedling level sort of samples from this simulation system.

And the sorts of results I'm getting, actually, hopefully, are a genuinely interesting, surprisingly rich, given how, I think, ridiculously simple this system is, sort of set of structures.

So these are all about 50 million cells.

And this, I guess, it's almost like a sort of slightly brain-like, I guess, but not quite, maybe more geometric.

But it has sort of echoes of those sort

was like brain like folds.

Maybe this one's a bit more like maybe a reptile skin and this one's even more stretched folded sort of skin.

And this one's maybe more like sort of a coral like form.

And this one, I guess maybe reminiscent of fish scales, maybe particular shark scales under a microscope.

And I guess one thing I'm interested in is not making anything that's specifically like in a specific form in nature, but things which maybe have echoes of multiple different things and maybe sort of, you know, sort of, so you have reminiscences.

But I guess one thing I've been finding is

almost everything that does make structural sense, even though it's such a ridiculously simple system removed from biology, seems to have echoes.

It seems to be almost like it either does nothing or it explodes or it does something that makes sense and it's almost remarkably familiar, maybe of two or three things from nature.

Maybe this one's maybe a bit like us or lungs or internal organs.

And this one, actually, this one I think is almost quite likely, it's probably about the least obviously biological structural thing that I got from that simulation engine.

But even that, I think, looks, I mean, there's people that say maybe it's a bit like, was like insect mandibles under a really powerful microscope.

But also maybe it's more geological, a bit like the sort of like rock formations you get underwater when some volcanic rock solidifies really fast sort of underwater.

So that thing has biological, natural echoes and reminiscences.

So then I'm working with these producing artifacts.

So here's an art exhibition I had with, but presenting them in a number of different ways.

So that's one thing I'm interested in.

It's almost like the data from the simulation is almost the original thing that's created.

And there's no right way of seeing that.

Almost like every way of turning it into an artifact, every way of visualizing it has different biases and different ways that, you know, different things you might perceive and different ways that people, you know, actually seeing the work react, you know.

So things like, you know, this has got like high resolution 2D prints and a 3D printed sculpture.

And there's also sort of, you know, two projection screens with like, you know, big animated projections.

Actually, one of the things with these is that there's actually an arrangement of mirrors between the screens.

The idea is that if you looked into the mirrors the correct way, it's actually realized the whole installation is basically a really large stereo viewer, so you could see the structures as 3D sculptures effectively.

And what I find is that it's not just that the 3D things are better than 2D.

It's actually because the way that you engage with things, the way you act with things, you actually read things differently.

Often I'm also showing things maybe like X-ray view of the same data next to what's like an external render of the external surfaces.

And you see different things in each view.

So that's just one thing I'm interested in.

It's almost like having a range of different ways of turning this into an artifact, and maybe it's almost like playing with mixing those together.

was working with almost like then making modifications experimenting with the medium by almost like different you know actually extra ingredients into the system most extra constraints so this is a sequence here called uh plant-like forms where what i was doing was whereas the there's generally spherical like forms i was showing you previously light rays to create food would come from all directions uniformly

In this, it was like, well, what happens if the light rays generally come from above?

It's almost like a narrow set of directions.

Well, just that exactly the same system, but just with that sort of just change rule, suddenly you start getting much more sort of plant-like and sometimes almost like fungal-like sort of structures growing.

So quite different sort of shapes by just only just one very, very small change to the setup of the system.

And then there's a series called hybrid forms, which was then looking at the simplest steps towards multicellularity so that everything I've shown you previously, all the cells in the structure had identical properties to each other.

So it was like only one cell type in the whole form.

In this, it was like, well, what happens if you have more than one cell type?

Well, let's have the simplest version, almost like a ridiculously simple version of that, where we just choose two different cell types.

You can say like cell type A and cell type B. And then other cells that can be almost like on that continuum between the two.

So actually what you're showing here is four different visualizations of the data from one point.

where the green-blue sort of form is showing the different cell types.

So the bright green parts are one cell type, the bright blue parts are another cell type, and the colors between the two, the sort of cyan-teal sort of colors,

are cells that are somewhere, you know, a blend between those cells.

And just that very small change, instead of ending up with most things being these pollen-like sort of spheres, suddenly you're getting almost like things that look like, you know, rich sea creatures or embryo-like structures, things like that.

So it was like in a surprising extra range of morphologies of structures just from, again, it's like ridiculously naive, simple version of multicellularity.

And then the final sort of art series I'm going to show is one cool look called the vase forms.

So this was trying to experiment with trying to make forms which I could actually fabricate as sculptures.

Where what I was wanting them to do was be sculptures that could be, well, stand on something.

So it must be vase-like sort of forms that potentially could, you know, have a flat bottom to stand on things.

And potentially also a flat top.

So we potentially could use this as almost like

you know, maybe supports for tables or columns or something like that.

So a sort of like different, almost like, this was, I guess, an experiment in trying to steer the forms in a direction, but not overly controlling things.

So what we decided to do in this was firstly, because we were wanting these sort of like, you know, sort of like forms with, you know, flat bottoms, flat tops.

Well, let's start by growing the cells that are starting in a tube where the cells at the top and the cells at the bottom are constrained to being in a plane.

So they can move in that plane, slide in that plane, but they can't, you know, but they always still will stay inside in that plane.

And then as the structure grows, the daughter cells of those cells at the top and bottom will also be in those planes.

So END-UP is almost like a growing tube of cells that sort of stretch between these two planes.

And then a number of other influences to sort of like basically changing the rates of growth in different places.

And the first of these was trying to make things which hopefully would steer things towards possibly being naturally 3D printable.

So I guess one of the big sort of limitations in like simple 3D printing, I think what's called like fused filament deposition,

is that if you've got too much of an overhang, you can't print it unless you build lots of additional support structure, which you then have to cut out and throw away.

So the idea was, well, if the overhang angle was in the local area of cells could influence

the growth rates.

Maybe we slow down the growth if we get beyond certain overhang angles.

Maybe that's a way of almost creating a bias in the systems, not creating a strict engineering simulation sort of like, you know, it doesn't guarantee that everything will be 3D printable.

But hopefully it's a bias that's affected by overhang angles so that hopefully in almost the space of possibilities this system is going to create, they're hoping to be quite a few forms which are naturally 3D printable without having to build extra support structures.

And then once you go, okay, we've got the idea of then changing growth rates in parts structure, maybe we can use that in some other ways as well.

So I introduced it, we want vaguely VARs-like forms, so narrower at the bottom and sort of wider at the top.

Well, let's just put that in as a vertical, something like rate change, so that cells towards the top of the structure can generally split faster than cells towards the bottom.

And also, if we don't want this structure to grow too far outwards, we can also use the distance of each cell from a central axis to change the growth rate.

So basically, the idea with these, all the sort of, it's a bit like addressing different amounts of nutrients, I guess, you know, in this sort of like space.

Almost like, I want the plant to grow more here and less there.

So hopefully it sort of influences the growth, but without overly specifically directorially controlling everything.

It's almost like, I don't want to throw the baby out of the bathwater.

I want to, you know, the, I want to let rich emergent behavior still occur in the system, but in a way that I've slightly directed it to create these hopefully VARs like structures.

So, um,

Obviously, this animation.

So this is what I then got from some of those initial tests.

And I guess I was looking for some rich surprises.

And this really did surprise me because it didn't work.

It didn't produce forms which were going to be 3D printable without support structures in the way I'd hoped.

It started growing these almost like, I think, really interesting

but you know often really filigree branch like tendril like horizontal like the sort of structures coming out of the forms so i guess it's almost like a cautionary tale almost like don't try to outguess complex systems or you know they they will they often produce really incredibly rich behavior but if you're trying to direct them they will often go in a completely unexpected direction but i think the

programming, creating these sorts of branch-like structures, I think would actually be really quite difficult.

So I think what's interesting is this is genuinely emergent.

I really was not intending to make these types of forms, structures from this code, but almost the system was rich enough that it just happened, you know, emergently.

um and the reason that i sort of looked into it it's like okay what's happening um it was basically it was first of all a bug in my code that i guess i'm creating you know food in cells based on this sort of simulated photosynthesis and light rays coming in hitting cells

But one thing I was doing was because I've got these cells between two sheets and then I'm growing more and more and more cells, I was deliberately shrinking the cells, shrinking the rest length as the sheet grew.

But I was forgetting to do that sort of change of shrinking the size of the cells as far as the photosynthesis code.

I hadn't sort of put that into that bit of the code.

So as far as the photosynthesis, the light rays were concerned, all these cells were huge.

So these big cells, one cell sticks out a little bit further than its neighbours, it tends to shadow all its neighbours and grabs all the food.

So anything that sticks out a little bit becomes the focus where all the food happens.

And then the second thing was how I'd implemented these varying growth rates, things like the overhang angle,

I hadn't thought through properly.

What I tried doing was, I guess, trying to be a bit too clever.

It's always dangerous trying to be a bit too clever.

I sort of thought, OK, simple way to do that is I could just change the rate of time.

It was like I can slow down growth by making time go slower in some parts of the structure than in other.

That's a fun, cute idea.

bad idea.

Basically what that was doing was effectively freezing the structure when it got beyond certain overhang angles.

So essentially what I've done is come up with a recipe to cause growth where anything that sticks out a little bit further from the surface than other things nearby

And if anything goes beyond an overhang angle, it becomes solidified, it becomes a permanent structure.

So essentially it's a recipe to create, accidental recipe to create these like branch-like forms.

So it's useless to make actually fabricated sculptures, but I think really interesting in its own right.

So it almost becomes an accidental artwork series.

So I've been presenting these in sort of stereoscopic installation.

So here's an example.

This is actually a wall mounted sort of stereo piece.

So it's basically sort of like two high resolution screens and then two mirrors.

And hopefully it's hopefully an interesting piece.

If you'd like in a gallery, it looks a bit almost like a slightly crazy computer triptych.

But if you put your eyes at the place where the viewing goggles are in the middle, basically, and then look through those, it's basically a mirror stereo viewer so that you can then see this as an animating, rotating form with the forms growing.

But it's a sculpture, 3D sculpture, but it's a virtual 3D sculpture.

And then I went and looked at the code and said, okay,

you know worked out why why it was creating these crazy branches it's almost like fix the code so then um and then that's now creating much more i guess what i more expected so these sort of forms which are these more files like structures generally small hopefully more 3d printable but still hopefully having like a really interesting range

the different structures and forms and hopefully it's surprisingly natural looking, but having these variations of things like some areas with really incredible details, some areas really stretched and smooth, some areas with these deep crevices and grooves, which also structurally may be really strong.

um but you know and then some areas almost like canopy like structures almost i guess when you hit certain growth rates where you start getting like real proliferation of cells then you start getting these almost canopies again so i hadn't expected i'm deliberately i guess programmed into it but you know it's a behavior that i found from just experimenting with it and i really like

tree sculptures.

So this is actually an exhibition from actually the Victoria and Albert Museum in London invited me to have an exhibit as part of the London Design Festival.

So this is like an exhibit with some sculptures and also I guess it was almost like developmental series of small maquettes and sculptures showing them going from their original tube-like structure to the final sort of vase, basically going from about 300 cells to start with to about 10 or 20 million cells by the end.

and also you know animations showing the structures grow sort of growing so i hope you see i'm i am actually be able to make these forms actually as surreal sculptures so now i'm going to sort of like switch into maybe almost like talking a bit more about the process and the back story behind this because these exist systems so both

Basically, it's the problem of like, you know, okay, now, when I've got a system like this, how do I find interesting behavior?

How do I find things which I think is particularly rich and things that, you know, I look at and think, you know, there's something of aesthetic quality or something that a reason that I react to that form, but don't react to that form.

And I guess one intuition I've got is that it's often almost transition points in the behaviors, the space of behaviors that you're always looking for.

You're looking for not so much typical behavior, but the sort of interesting atypical behavior that often happens at transition points.

So this is actually a plot from a work from quite a few years ago called the aggregation series, which basically is a plot of changing parameter values.

So in this series, I just had a small number, two or three parameter values, almost changing the environment that things were growing in, basically using a very, or even simpler form of growth, what's called diffusion limited aggregation.

So this is basically where along the horizontal axis, I'm changing one parameter of the environment, along the vertical axis, changing a different parameter.

And I guess what you get from this is you get to the far right-hand side, the system's becoming unstable.

It's getting to the point where the forces in the environment are so strong that it's almost shredding the structures.

And in this, it's almost the tipping point as you get into that instability, almost in the sort of sixth and seventh columns, where you start to see, I think, some, you know, interesting, rich, unexpected sort of structures, which, you know, the pensioner, you know, okay, that's something that has some artistic qualities to it.

So it's almost like, how do you then sort of find transition barriers?

Maybe those sort of transitions to instability.

It might be, I guess, in chaotic systems, almost like transition point between regularity and chaos, the border as you get into chaos, like the edge of the Mandelbrot set where potentially interesting behavior happens.

or just almost like any other different behavior maybe two different places in the space with different behavior and maybe there's a boundary between the two where we get some sort of like hybrid interesting transitions happening so i guess the problem was how to explore that if you've got sort of two or three parameters you can just do plots like i was showing you you know that the previously but what happens you get more parameters you know so you know and often these sort of cellular growth systems are getting like 12 20 30 40 parameters

So one thing I've been writing over quite a lot, actually over the last 10 years, is writing a piece of software called Speech Explorer, which is basically just an interface for me to use to try to explore the parameter space and the possibilities.

So basically, what I can use is this software, it sets off, chooses parameters to try new samples to generate forms at, sets off the generation engine, and then gets back the images from the generation engine once it's generated a form, and then I can look at that in the user interface, and I can do things like I can give them scores.

So I can say, well, that one just failed.

The simulation didn't run.

We'll give that a zero.

That it ran, but it was really rubbish.

Let's give it a one out of 10.

That's a bit more interesting, maybe a three or four out of 10, or that's really quite interesting, maybe about six or seven.

So basically just giving it subjectively a score of what I think almost like aesthetic value.

But I can also give scores for other things, like how many tendrils something's got.

Or I can put things into categories.

So I can say that those things all remind me of furry structures.

Those are all brain-like things.

Those are broccoli.

Those are sea creatures.

I can give things almost like names and categories, which is hopefully then useful data to almost like help navigate the parameter space.

And then I can use almost like a number of different methods to then set off generating another next population, that set of individuals.

So I can maybe just generate individuals with random parameters, which potentially, particularly when you're starting with a new system, I've got no idea what parameter values, I've only put together a set of interesting ingredients, but I've no idea what parameter values may work.

Let's just try things randomly.

And once I've seen a few things, maybe I could start using evolutionary methods.

So particularly if I've found a form I really quite like, just maybe creating some mutants around it.

So close in the space around that individual, randomly mutate the parameter values and generate another one.

Or crossbreed that individual with another one.

So almost like taking a leaf out of evolutionary methods.

The other thing I've also been using is very quite simple machine learning.

So it's basically a system what's called k-nearest neighbors, which is like a ridiculously simple form of machine learning where you just estimate values or categories based on what is the value of the nearest neighbors in the parameter space.

So it's almost like I will estimate the score at a new point in the parameter space as being what are the scores of other things that I've already sampled nearby.

So ridiculously simple form of machine learning, which hopefully gives me some level of prediction of new points in the parameter space, as long as I haven't got too many parameters.

And so I've been using this as a number of different techniques in here.

Now, more recently, I guess one of the stories in artificial intelligence is deep neural networks have become the thing.

There was incredibly interesting results from deep neural networks and training these on huge data sets.

So I guess one question is then, well, can we start using deep neural networks to almost take these ideas even further?

So this is something that I've been, I guess, actively working on the last couple of years, actually is a project together with John McCormack and Professor John McCormack and his SensiLab group at Monash University down in Melbourne.

And I guess if you wanted to look at much more about this, I guess we had a paper in Evo Musart earlier this year and also just a couple of months ago, an article in the Journal of Neural Computing Applications.

That journal article has got some of our latest results.

If you're interested in finding out more, go and have a look at those.

But I'm just going to talk a little bit about some of what we've been finding.

It's almost like new work trying to say, can we use deep neural networks?

So I guess the motivation is, OK, can deep neural networks?

Well, previously, what I've always been doing is rating and categorizing everything myself just by looking at the renders that come from the simulation engine.

Can a deep neural net start to do that?

You know, we'll learn my preferences, learn what, you know, how I react to things and start to reliably rate and categorize things if it can see based on the images, what you call the phenotypes.

And also, I'm doing these very naive estimates of what the scores and ratings would be at new points in the parameter space using k-nearest neighbors, this very simple form of machine learning.

Well, are there other things where could deep neural nets do better?

Particularly if I can predict what the values are at new points in the parameter space, maybe that can give me those tools to directly navigate to interesting new places in the genotype space.

So basically, that's sort of the motivation.

So what we've been working with is actually main data from the original cellular forms, where basically we've got about just over 1,700 cellular forms, which I basically, from the original work, have rated and categorized all the forms into categories like animal and balloon and brain and plant.

And these all have like 12 parameters in their sort of genotype.

So that's basically the data set.

And actually, we published this data set.

So it's actually on GitHub open source.

People can look at the data set and use it in their own research work if you want to.

If you just go to the journal paper, we've got the links to where the data set is.

And so what we've been doing this, well, firstly, one thing is, well, can just, can it automatically categorize things?

So using techniques, the things that were called variational autoencoders and TSNE, can this kind of deep neural net almost automatically without new training from me, start to categorize things in a way which seems to roughly match maybe the sorts of categories and divisions that I'm making.

and what we're finding is in genotype space it really doesn't that we are genotype space at least all the techniques we're trying so far are effectively dimensional reduction methods based on the deep neural net data um or general net produces a vector which is then dimensionally reduced

it really seems to almost always just be a bit of a mess.

But on the phenotype space, when it's actually looking at the images, we do seem to be getting things that seem to make structural sense.

And almost this potentially could be tools to help, almost be more suggestions for how to divide the forms into different categories.

Maybe almost like finer subdivisions, maybe that I've made, almost like interesting subcategories to make.

So based on the lower plot there, you have been seeing that, you know, the categories that I put things into seem to almost like match reasonably nicely with what this, which is using TSME to do dimensional reduction, seems to produce like quite sort of, you know, interestingly structural meaningful results.

And then looking at like, can it sort of like score things and rate things, you know, sort of similar to me based on both the image data and the phenotype and the parameter values, the sort of genotype.

So what we're using here is actually two different types of neural nets.

So firstly, from the image data, we're using ResNet-50, which is a reasonably state of the art convolutional neural network used to classify images or classify and rank images.

so basically this is a neural net that's been uh or pre-trained on over a million images from the image net database so guess it's almost been already trained how to see and then what we can do is just train the last few layers of the network to say you know okay what we want you to do is rating and categorizing our sort of cellular forms data

And the second thing is using what's called a fully connected deep neural net.

It's where you've got a certain number of hidden layers.

So basically we can set our own inputs, which would be the parameter values and the genotype, outputs being the scores and categories we're interested in, and then a small number of layers and neurons between the two as a way of hopefully getting predictions based on the genotype space.

And what we're finding is it has worked.

So basically, compared with k-nearest neighbors, where we were getting basically at best about a 50% prediction accuracy, there are things like ResNet-50 looking at the image data is getting about an 87% prediction accuracy.

And a fully connected deep neural network on the genotype parameter is getting just under about 70%.

So deep neural nets seem to be already doing better significantly than we were getting with k-nearest neighbors.

So it's useful.

And then what we're looking at is integrating this into Species Explorer in a sort of number of different ways, almost to help to be tools to help explore the space.

So the first one is almost like what we call a categorizer.

So the idea of this is it's showing us what predict, what categories it would be putting things into.

But also showing us the confidence levels.

So that basically with green levels on the left-hand side or where it's got something saying it's got high confidence that this is the category it's putting it in, it's got the category correct.

Whereas things on the right-hand side and the blues and purples are things where it's saying, this is the category it thinks it's in, but it's not that confident.

It could be close to being in a different category.

So what the idea is that hopefully with a really quite small amount of training data, we'd be able to see how reliably it's working and what we need to maybe how to correct it, which things it's getting wrong.

And also maybe to confirm things it's got right, but really quite quickly correct where it makes mistakes and retrain it again, retrain again, hopefully with a relatively small amount of training data, get it to the point where it's like really quite reliably sort of categorizing things.

And then we can use this almost like to automatically look for transition points.

So the idea is here we couldn't take and check like two forms, maybe like form on the left is what we categorize as balloon-like, form on the right is what we categorized as brain-like, and then it can generate almost just a simple binary chop search.

They can generate the form in parameter space halfway between the two.

and then generate that form.

The ResNet-50 can look at it.

It decides, oh, that looks like another brain-like form.

Okay, now let's look halfway between, you know, now the new sort of almost half range.

And it just can keep on narrowing down, hopefully getting closer and closer to transition points.

I guess there might not be a transition point between these two categories, but if there is, hopefully this is a sensible, simple approach to try to find a transition point automatically.

So I can set this off overnight, come back in the morning,

And hopefully I'm seeing examples like this where it has hopefully automatically found a potential sort of hybrid transition, which may well be interesting.

And the next thing is almost like directly showing us almost what the landscape looks like, so in the geotype space.

So this is what was like showing 2D sections through the parameter space, but with predictions from the neural net where it's predicting.

So almost like the red areas where it's predicting this balloon-like form.

The light blue is predicting a brain-like, and yellow is where it's predicting animal-like.

So I guess this area between the red and the blue

is hopefully a transition zone it might not be because it might not have enough data to be well trained yet but i can just see this interface then click on that position generate a form at that have a look at it so i hope but hopefully i also have you getting to see and understand the landscapes almost like these ones like mapping tools to help explore the space and possibilities

And finally, this is actually some recent work, so where we're trying to generate some forms which actually potentially might be fabricated at room scale, but with almost like tree-like and root-like behaviour.

I hope you're seeing we're actually hopefully getting a really quite interesting mix of, you know, almost like hybrid-like sort of behaviours sort of going on in some of these forms and structures.

um okay so i think that's the end end of my presentation and hopefully we got time for uh some sort of some discussion so i sort of just stopped sharing my screen


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, awesome.

Thank you so much, Andy.

That was really an exceptional talk.

And there's a lot of cool stuff and also some great comments from the participants.

So first is just a note.

And the question is, some of the videos were a bit just choppy, which is all good.

Other than your site, the videos tab.

Is there anywhere else where people could go look at the videos?


SPEAKER_02:
Yes, so there's, I mean, all, I think most of those videos are on my Vimeo channel.

So just go to Vimeo Andy Lomas, all one word.

That's my Vimeo channel with almost all those videos.

Yeah, I think...

I guess the only video probably wasn't shown there is the one where I was just showing the with and without the forces between the cells, but all the videos of, and actually things like hybrid forms video, I think is actually really interesting, which I probably would have showed if I had more time.

So you go to my Vimeo channel, Vimeo slash Andy Lomas.


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

We'll include that in the video description as well.

So here are a few questions from the audience.

So one question was, what is happening inside of the vase-like forms when you're looking at them or other forms, like with an x-ray from the inside?

What is that like?


SPEAKER_02:
Again, actually, I guess definitely look at the Vimeo channel.

I could try sharing a video right now if you want.

Very different, I think, is the answer.

You see very different structures, most of the internal things.

And what's surprising is what you could see on the outside often disappears.

So it's actually, you know, it's not...

You perceive very different things.

So if you go to my Vimeo channel, there is examples of those.

And most of you have looked, you know, it's like cellular forms and they have cellular forms x-ray, which is like the x-ray version of the same thing.

And actually, this is also something I've been doing some work on recently.

I've been actually with some of the latest GPU hardware.

There's hardware acceleration for ray tracing on some of the latest GPUs.

I'm actually now able to get rendering in real time, which makes you can have like a stereo view, which you can actually interact with, which I think also gives you another level of depth perception, including both...

uh step x-ray and these sort of external views and from looking at like an x-ray view in a stereoscopic view that i can actually manipulate directly i've i've just recently seen structures in there which i wasn't aware of myself so yeah it's almost been revealing you know getting new new things which is already there in the data but just because i hadn't been able to perceive them with enough dimensionality you know i wasn't aware of previously


SPEAKER_00:
Perfect.

And also, you don't see it on your video side, but I am showing on this recording videos from your Vimeo on the screen.

So people are getting to see them.

Cool.

So the next question was, how do we keep track of the feedback going on during the embryonic growth simulation that you showed?

Can we track positive and negative feedback loops as they interact?


SPEAKER_02:
So I just lost the end of that question there.


SPEAKER_00:
So how do we model feedback loops during embryonic development?


SPEAKER_02:
Can you say that again, Daniel?


SPEAKER_00:
How do we model the feedback loops in the embryonic development?


SPEAKER_02:
How do we model the feedback loops?

I'm trying to think of what I was saying.

So one thing is I'm generally, after all these simulations, I'm not intervening once the simulation actually starts running.

So I'm always, I'm sort of just choosing parameter values in the parameter space to using the Species Explorer and things like that.

So it was like new genotypes to try out.

But once I'm setting off a simulation, I'm just almost like letting it run.

uh and then choosing ones that i i like uh so it's almost like just letting a seedling grow and i guess there's there's feedback loops just inherently in the simulation engine things like you know because the cells are all affecting each other that you know where each cell moving to different positions then causes you know sort of you know cell a effects that's all b and cell b is felt cell a and you know there's and there's lots of interconnectedness which i guess is almost like the essence of you know having sort of you know in in

to connected non-linearity and having, you know, iteration of multiple time steps as being almost the essence of most complex systems.

Does that sort of answer the question?


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, great answer.

Here's another question.

Some of these projects were visually beautiful, but also required significant computational power, like you mentioned, graphical cards and other things.

And you also had the transition point plot that was like a search in parameter face space, but it was being evaluated artistically.

So just from these projects, what insights would you have for how interdisciplinary teams could be working together or how there could be a fruitful discussion with machine learning and aesthetics and complexity?

How can we facilitate that conversation?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, that's an interesting one.

I guess I do what I'm doing because I'm interested in it, if I'm really honest.

People seem to be interested in exhibitions and me doing things as artistic artifacts.

I guess that gives me a certain freedom to play and I guess the direction of, I don't have to justify myself.

It's just what I find aesthetic and interesting can drive it.

But one conversation I have had is with people much more from a pure science background.

So recently, I was doing some work together as a life science institute up at Dundee University.

And actually, they've got an art exhibition space in the Life Sciences Institute.

So basically, I was involved in an exhibition there.

One thing we did was there was a researcher, a physicist seconded to the institute, who's actually doing very similar almost process simulations of cell growth.

But one thing that was interesting was like the similarities and differences between what we were doing.

So Rusko was almost, was guessed, you know, that the simulations would have been true to the biology.

And, you know, it was obviously a key and important.

So often doing things to much lower levels of cell counts, but because you'd be trying to do things as accurate as possible.

Whereas I'm generally just trying to do things

you know, doing millions of cells.

I mean, one rule of thumb I've always got is that you've got to do at least a million things before it becomes somewhere psychologically, visually interesting.

So I was always, you know, avoiding the accuracy in favor of, you know, just being able to do computational, just amount of data, amount of complexity.

And also, I guess, the thing where usually, I guess, in the science side, you're more always trying to categorize sort of typical behaviors.

Whereas I'm often more just diving into the canyons, almost the atypical papers.

Not that you always have to go that direction in science, but maybe that's the sort of just general tendency is that you're drawn to wanting to categorize the whole space where I'm going, whoa, here's a deep rabbit hole that I think is particularly interesting.

So, yeah, I guess it almost gives you permissions and different directions to go.

But maybe there's some interesting dialogues that can come from that.

Actually, one thing we did was actually almost created our own work.

We did a thing where Roscoe commented on my artwork and I also then created some of the Roscoe's science simulations, which we edited together as a video to go in the art exhibition.

So it's almost like, you know, artists commenting on scientists and scientists commenting on artists.


SPEAKER_00:
Wow, thanks for that.

That's really a beautiful metaphor with the parameter space and what the artist sees and what the utilitarian sees.

So here's just one final question before we adjourn to the Jitsi link that the RSVPs have.

This last question is about just change in time, kind of a feature of complex systems.

How has your aesthetic perception changed over time while you work with these forms?

So when you rate them or just in playing with them, how do the way that they interface with you, how does that change through time?


SPEAKER_02:
Sorry, can you actually say that again?

So the sound's getting a bit choppy.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, yeah.

So just how do you develop in your relationship to making and viewing these forms?

Like as you work with one shape family or tool more, how does your aesthetic perception change?

Okay.


SPEAKER_02:
Oh, okay, yeah, yeah, I guess that's a good question.

It's almost like, you know, you're going into, yes, a new system, and it's almost terra incumita, or maybe almost like a fear that you've just misprogrammed it, and, you know, is it going to produce anything at all interesting?

And I guess then there's, that's one of the things, I guess, is that, you know, it feels almost to me like you go through a number of phases, that there's almost like, sort of like an initial, almost like random exploration.

It's almost like, you know, you're parachuted deep into the forest, and you've got no idea what's around.

Then after you've found a few possible, and you start to find this is swampy areas you don't want to go back to.

It really doesn't work around here.

So it starts almost like maybe just getting very broad ideas of what possibly works at all, but also lots of things that just don't work and you should avoid.

And then you start maybe saying hints of things which may be more interesting.

And then you maybe want to focus on those and start to find that and find what is this almost like a niche that you want to explore more.

But then once you've seen, you know, you've found like, you know, hey, it looks like there are cauliflowers over there.

I hope that's interesting.

Once you've generated a few hundred cauliflowers, you're getting really bored of them.

So it's then you're actually interested in novelty and things like that.

So you actually must be going through different phases, which is one of the, I almost critique, I guess, of, you know, classic, you know, treating this as an optimization, treating this or the classic interactive genetic algorithm tools and things like that,

It's particularly as you want your intention changes.

It might just one day to the next that I'm actually interested in lighting up close to an exhibition.

I want to refine things to get a need.

That looks pretty interesting.

It's pretty good enough, but are there even more interesting things close to it?

I want to do a family of those all together.

So, which might want to say very different tools from, okay, is there anything just completely, utterly new out there?

I want to see, and genetic techniques often tend to get trapped in niches, as to my mind.

that's okay so your relationship with the system really does change over time and maybe later on you start maybe becoming a bit too precious of it you know it's like you you don't want to change things because you might break it and you know lose what you found that's already cool so you don't want to start with a new system so it is it's it's something you learn so and it's learning it's like working with clay or looking within paint a new type of paint or something like that

that you learn how to work with the medium.

So yeah, it very much is a progress.

And that's one thing I'm interested in is how is me as a human working in combination with the computer.

I need the computer to do these simulations, but I also need the computer almost as my collaborator to help me explore, work with the medium.

Particularly, I guess in my mind, it's almost like making me brave enough to work with even more unruly systems.

It's almost like, if I don't have the computer helping me, I will try to be too tame.

And I want to be a bit more fearless.

And hopefully these things like using machine learning and things like that will hopefully allow me to be even more fearless with working with these sorts of systems.

And the more unruly it is, hopefully the more rich, maybe the more difficult to find interesting results, but hopefully the richer those results might be.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks for explaining that frontier to us.

Just one last quick question.

Somebody asked, what is the name of the scientist at Dundee University?


SPEAKER_02:
there a collaborator at dundee um so you're asking you're asking who the scientist was that's what somebody asked yeah uh so just trying to find a rest code's name

Dr. Rastko Sknebnek.

Have I got, I don't think I've got chat on this though, or do I have chat?

You can send the chat.

I can spell it for you.


SPEAKER_00:
You can spell it.

R-A-S-T-K-O.

Okay.

We can definitely do the chat.

But thanks for the question.

And while you're typing it, thanks again, Andy.


SPEAKER_02:
It's S-K-N-E-P-N-E-K.

Basically, Dr. Rasko Sknepek at the School of Life Sciences in Dundee.


SPEAKER_00:
perfect well andy thank you so much for this fantastic talk gave a lot of us a lot to think about and we will adjourn now to the jitsi that we have provided everyone with and thanks again for watching it live or in replay and we will see you all in the jitsi in a couple of minutes thanks again andy bye