UNKNOWN:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_03:
Oh, God.


UNKNOWN:
Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

music music

Bye.

Oh.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you.


UNKNOWN:
Bye.


SPEAKER_00:
So I can hear you in Jitsi and then there'll be a few seconds delay.

It seems like it's still not getting audio.

So go to settings and then output.

And then in the streaming box, make sure the audio bit rate is set to like 160.

Yeah.

All right, now I do believe that I'm on the live stream audio.

So that sounds good.

Okay.

Okay, so we are live, and the audio is being captured, so I'm just going to start.

Blu, keep on... Maybe you can go to the second slide while you recrop, and then you can recrop everything while I just give a short introduction.

How does that sound?

All right.

Well, welcome, everyone, to our June 2021 Complexity Weekend Heartbeat.

Today, I'm Daniel, and I'm here with Blue.

So Blue, awesome work with live streaming, and we're figuring it out live.

We're learning the complexities of live streaming by doing.

And today in this intro video, we're going to have two main sections.

There's going to be an organizer's introduction, and then there's going to be an interactive Jamboard, which we'll post the link in a live chat very soon.

So while Blue is cropping the windows all

expect from these two sections.

Also, you might want to disable, Blue, the night vision because it makes the slides look different.

So in this organizer's introduction, first, we're going to be giving a welcome to Complexity Weekend.

That's going to be who we are and some information on the registration statistics from May 2021 weekend, which hard to believe, but it was just one month ago.

Then we'll talk about our purpose, values, and some participation guidelines.

Following that section of the organizer's intro, we will be talking about what's going to happen in the

Heartbeat events today and tomorrow, which is from 9 a.m.

to 1 p.m.

Pacific time on Saturday and 1 to 5 p.m.

on Sunday.

We'll talk about the event program as well as about using the Gather platform.

Okay, so I still see the night vision slides and blocked out Jitsis.

Yep.

So we will, we will figure this out.

Thanks everybody.

Who's, uh, joining, let us know in the live chat, like if, if you are hearing us or if you aren't hearing us, because we want to make sure that this is a watchable and rewatchable.

Well, I'll just go into, uh, maybe you can go to the slide with the initial conditions in history while you continue.

Oh, okay.

All right, great.

Well, while you continue cropping, just as a bit of an intro for those who are coming to Complexity Weekend for the first time, which is awesome, a little bit about our history.

We had our first Complexity Weekend in person in San Francisco in May 2019.

And since then, we've had three online weekends.

And each of those has been a little bit of a development in terms of the structure, as well as a growth in terms of the participation.

So, you know, in reality, where the live streaming is lag free and you don't need to craft people in person, each online weekend has really been a great opportunity to learn about these new opportunities and constraints of online communication, as well as.

include more and more people so just as we have on the slide in may 2020 we had about 70 participants and about seven teams in october 2020 second online weekend we introduced an element of having the facilitators give flipped classroom videos that's what we called it then and then in may 2021 we had a more extended pre-weekend

period with a lot of in-person or at least synchronous events.

And that was really awesome, those one-on-one events, which we're going to have also during this heartbeat.

And we had almost 200 participants, a bunch of teams forming, and a lot of momentum for our November weekend.

So you could probably crop a little bit more slash differently blue so that the slides are fully visible.

Great.

Great.

Yeah, thank you.

So while you continue to crop, I will see that you're on the community growth and renewal slide.

So on the y-axis here in the green line, we kind of have like a community energy metric.

And it's a fluctuating, it's an oscillating metric, just as all complex systems are.

The big notches on the x-axis here are the weekends.

Those are sort of those local peaks of energy.

And then the smaller bumps are on each of the 10 months per year that are not weekends.

We have a heartbeat.

And the heartbeat, which is the event that you're here at right now, it's a little different each time.

because the co-organizer team is a little different.

So we kind of pass the formal documents over from month to month and then allow the organizers of that month to take it and run with it and develop the events however they see fitting best into what the community needs.

So here we are in the June 2021 heartbeat and we have that little energy peak.

So it's awesome to see that there's

people watching the livestream and we know that you'll be joining us for our sessions in Gather.

And then in the background, there's that yellow line, you and your team, your relationships.

And this is from thinking about Complexity Weekend and about participation as a complex system where

We set the rhythm as an organization, as a community with the weekends and with the heartbeats, but it's about your complexity journey, the fun skills that you're learning along the way, of course, and the relationships you build and just how you're building your connections to complexity and seeing how it applies in various different domains.

Next slide, please, blue.

Okay, I'm not sure what is happening here.

The bandwidth's fine, so the slides disappeared.

And it seems Sasha is informing us that there's some people waiting at another stream.

Oh.

okay okay thanks sasha so this one i'm gonna go don't know what to do about that um can you post this in the chat it just didn't go to the right live stream but let's just continue again so the one that we're live on we can't

switch horses in the middle of the stream, unfortunately.

So we're just going to continue rolling with it.

Yeah, the link in the email.

Yeah, it went to the wrong one.

But there's still nine people here.

Again, blue.

There's just a black screen.

Yeah.

So... I... Yeah.

Yeah.

So we're doing it live.

So thanks, everyone, for bearing with us.

And thankfully, it's only been a few minutes past the hour.

I'll ask if they can

Yep, it did go to a different one.

Yep.

Okay.

Okay, so we're seeing the slides, but they're not cropped properly.

Yeah.

Just the role-based, but it still is not very visible.

Yeah.

Okay.

Well, so we talked a little bit about the community's organization through time, and here it is in a role-based way of looking at it.

The biggest circle here is our participants.

It's the green circle, and everyone's a participant.

There are two main on-ramps for participation.

The first one is the one that you're at right now, the monthly heartbeats.

And the monthly heartbeats are our informal drop-in events.

So that's when you come and just participate at the times that work for you.

And then also on the bottom there, you still don't see it large enough, is the biannual weekend cohorts.

So these are those twice a year weekend events.

And then scattered inside and outside and on the interface of our community are teams and relationships.

Just make it bigger in OBS and then people will be able to see it.

And okay, great.

Nice, okay.

Welcome everybody who's just joining.

Yep, sorry about the fun.

It's too much fun for a Saturday.

Okay, looks good.

Thanks.

Within each event, we have a few roles, and this helps us have a distributed community as well as a circle of organizers that can each bring their own perspective as well as facilitators.

So the purple circle are the event organizers.

Those are people who just step up on a given event to be an organizer, which entails things like sending out RSVP forms and checking who's going to be at a certain event.

The green circle has the sub-circle of teal with the event facilitators.

And those are the people who facilitate live session.

And we're increasingly developing what it means to be a facilitator in terms of what is being facilitated.

The facilitators aren't there just to give a talk or to convey just a lecture.

They're there to really facilitate or catalyze something that's happening.

And then we have associates and supporters who help us with financial and other means.

Anything to add on this, Bloom?

Yes.

Good work.

Live streaming is fun and there's just no way to predict what's going to happen when you go live.

So let's continue on to the global participation.

This is just to give people a sense of what our participation structure looks like.

And this is the information from the May 2021 cohort.

We had about 200 participants from over 50 countries and more than 30 facilitators.

It was really an awesome weekend.

And our next weekend is going to be in November 12th through 14th, 2021.

And the pre-weekend will be starting.

Blue, they can't hear you, I don't think.

So your local audio, check that source.

And then go to the next slide.

So while Blue's figuring that one out.

I'll just mention that diverse perspectives are key for Complexity Weekend.

And again, this is drawing on the registration data for the May 2021 cohort.

There's two graphs here.

Yep, Kevin, thank you.

We'll follow up on this.

On the left, it's a word cloud of the responses to the question, what kind of problems are you interested in applying complexity to?

And there are so many awesome answers people

we're giving a lot of thoughts related to, of course, complexity, but also what's important to see is this long tail, all these small words that were infrequently used, and that just represents people who are bringing their own background from so many different areas and meeting in the middle at complexity.

And then on the right side, the question asks, you might want to move the gypsy a little bit.

Yep.

What is your familiarity with learning and applying complexity?

And this is something similar that we see at many of our events, which is there's a total continuum from people who are total complexity beginners, which is like a 1 out of 10 familiarity just starting to hear about it for the first time, all the way up to people who are extremely familiar.

And even those who have been learning complexity their whole life

You're only going to be learnt in a fraction of what there is to know.

And even if you could somehow learn all there was to know, there would still be the question of how to apply and communicate and teach and serve through complexity.

So we hope that this framing of learning by doing helps us recognize everyone's unique position on their complexity journey, and then also set the stage for coming together to something that's bigger.

Anything to add here, Blue?

And also we can test your audio.


SPEAKER_02:
So I think my audio is working.

Great.

And the only thing I would add is that the beginner's mindset is super important.

So the perspective, especially the perspective of the beginner, is something that is really valued in the Complexity community because we've all been beginners at one point and we're all working transdisciplinarily.

So when you work in a discipline that you're not familiar with, it's important to ask those questions that might seem basic.

So don't be afraid to ask questions when you're working with a group.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

So for the next 10 minutes, we'll go through just a little bit about the values and then about how it's going to happen today.

So just really quickly and

course we want to unpack this with you in the gather and over the coming months and years what brings us together is a shared purpose and interest in complexity science complexity thinking a desire to have impact on co-creative teams and improve our community of practice through feedback participation and peer mentorship and also our core values and desire to develop a community so you can go to our purpose and values so

What brings us together is sort of the appetizer, but our collective purpose is our highest level alignment.

And our purpose is to learn complexity science by doing, to serve through deep time,

and include to innovate diversity is key.

So these are some of the high level purposes that exist.

And the way that we implement our purpose is with core values.

So I'll read them out and then blue, you can give a thought.

So complexity weekend is itself a complex system.

Education is active, learn complexity science by doing teamwork makes the dream work.

Participation means accessibility and inclusion for all.

Respect is key.

Step up and be brave.


SPEAKER_02:
So just to add to the complex systems, a lot of, actually, projects that have come out of Complexity Weekend have been studying Complexity Weekend as a complex system, and that's been fun.

And just step up and be brave.

If you have skills, a lot of people, maybe they don't know how to...

you know, do network science or they don't know how to do agent-based modeling.

So, you know, they're kind of afraid to initialize a project or something like this.

But, you know, they may have other skills like project management or agile methodology.

So, you know, if those are your skills and you're not necessarily looking to implement like technical skills, don't be afraid to step up and implement like managerial skills because teams definitely need a thread to keep them together.

And all of those connecting pieces, especially in a framework where you want to get stuff done, is really important.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice point.

There's so many ways to be a team player and a participant.

What are our guidelines for participation?

These are just a few things that over the years we found help and it's always an evolving list.

So people's feedback on what kinds of participation guidelines would be helpful, would be awesome, and we'll have a space for actually putting that on the Jamboard in just a few minutes.

So adopt a complexity thinking mindset.

Communication is key, relationships like one-to-one as well as team communication, making sure that your team is aligned with you and synchronized on your understanding.

Embrace technology, but know its limits.

Use audio and visual etiquette and learning live streaming is of course part of that.

Live streaming is an amazing technology and let's relativize it to not having a live stream rather than some high production,

back office, which we don't have.

We respect full participation and appreciate diverse abilities.

So if you have a scheduling, something coming up last minute or it was scheduled before, it's all good.

We're here as a community whenever you're ready to participate in the days or months.

And reach out on the edges and stay involved.

That's how we'll have a network that's like a tapestry with resilience because of the edges between people who are in Complexity Weekend.

So there's no membership card.

It's about the relationships and the connections that you make while you're here.

So these are things that we hope

open the door to authentic and meaningful participation for you, however that means.

Anything else before we head into our organizers section?


SPEAKER_02:
I'm good.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

So how about you can introduce the organizers?


SPEAKER_02:
Sure.

So I'm Blue, I'm an organizer, and also Daniel, who has been speaking so eloquently throughout this live stream, and also Sean, who's not here right now, but I think will be around later or tomorrow.

And we are organizing this event, but if you want to organize an event in the future, reach out, because we are always in need of people to help organize a happy event.


SPEAKER_00:
All I'll say about co-organizing is there's no knowledge or background in complexity required.

Organizer is just what it sounds like.

You'll have access to a cloud folder with all the formal docs for planning the event and people who see areas for improvement, who get excited but think that there's something that could be better, that's the perfect position to be an organizer in.

And it won't just be offloaded on you.

We work together as a team to make sure that people are doing the parts of organization that get them excited.

So next.


SPEAKER_02:
And then the facilitators.

So we have three facilitators at this Heartbeat event that are all leading different sessions that you can see in the program when the sessions are.

So I think on the right, Jen Huff, she's our first session.

And then I think Jax is another session today.

And Sid is tomorrow, if I'm not mistaken.


SPEAKER_00:
We'll show the schedule in a second and show the times for everybody.

So yeah.

And the facilitators, again, these aren't lectures.

These are interactive sessions.

And we also really encourage people to start as the participants.

and then see an opportunity for a facilitation.

And again, you don't need to have some advanced degree in a field or some skill or some development.

A facilitator is just somebody who facilitates and catalyzes.

So if you think it'd be cool to be a center of gravity for a session where you just bring three thoughtful questions and facilitate a conversation, that's amazing.

That's being an awesome facilitator.

It's not like there's some secret knowledge.

It's about the emergence that the facilitators enable.

We're going to be using Gather as our spatial chat platform.

So just to quickly run through a few details of Gather, on the top left is the gear for settings, and you might find a few helpful settings there related to audio and visual, and also we're there to make sure that your audio and visual are working.

On the left, there's two chat bubbles, and that is like an ephemeral chat that you can send messages to just people nearby or everybody in the space at the time or just one person.

Then there's the People tab, which gives you a list of who's there at that time.

On the bottom bar, there is the ability to click on your character and adjust what they look like.

Then there's also this name on the bottom bar.

And by clicking on that, you can set your status and you can also respawn.

So if something weird happens, like you are in some parallel universe, it does happen.

Just click respawn.

And that will happen if you have been in the atrium before this recent redesign.

And then also on the bottom bar, there's the ability to see a mini map to share your screen and the smiley faces for emoji, including raising your hand.

So that's a great way to signal that you'd like to speak.

And related to the participation guidelines, it's awesome when we allow others to speak.

So if you're someone who's used to speaking out and ranting about complexity, let's make sure to hear from everyone.

And then on the bottom right, you'll see your ability to mute your video to turn it on or off.

That's all for Gather.

Anything else you want to say on that?


SPEAKER_02:
I want to just emphasize the respawn thing because, yeah, you're going to probably have to respawn if you've been to Complexity Weekend before.

So please remember that when you get there and you see people, but you're like, where are all these people?

Remember to respawn.

So if you see them, catch them the first time.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, great.

Okay, so let's look at the program.

So the link to the program, we will post that again right now in the live chat, and that is just the single source of truth for where all the links for everything are.

So we're right now in that 9 a.m.

Pacific livestream, and then we're going to have a Jamboard.

We'll post the link in just one second.

After this live stream ends, the rest of the activities are going to be in Gather.

So we have a facilitator session with Jen.

Then 75 minutes later, there will be the time for participant spotlight talks and open mic.

There will be poster sessions, but I'm not sure if there's any posters, actually, so we might just remove that row.

Then Jax will have a session at noon Pacific, and at 1 p.m., the interval kind of ends, but just note that at 7 Pacific or 2 a.m.

UTC on Sunday, that's when Sid is going to have a session on securing cyber-physical spaces.

That is awesome if you're interested in a variety of cyber-physical and security-related questions.

Then on Sunday, again, we have sort of a pre-hangout.

Then we're gonna kick off at 1 p.m.

Pacific on Sunday with a one-on-one session.

So these are what we had in our pre-weekend for the May 2021 weekend.

This is like an opportunity in a structured way to talk to a few people for a nice amount of time.

And then again, also we'll probably remove that poster session and then have another opportunity for participant spotlight talks.

And that's a heartbeat.

So that's the structure.

And then again, it's about the connection and the time you spend and the people you meet along the way.

Anything on the schedule there, Blue?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, it's also a really good time if you joined a team or thought about joining a team or spawned some ideas at the last Intensity Weekend.

The purpose of the heartbeat really is to kind of reconnect with those people, see if that energy is still alive, or maybe get a project.

Like, you worked a lot in a flurry of energy after the first weekend for maybe the first week and then forgot about it, so now is the time to kind of renew that energy and touch back in with your teams and projects that you're working on today.

So that's kind of why you have the heart to keep the project alive.


SPEAKER_00:
Great points there.

I think we can go to this last slide and I'll just have Jen join soon.

So to the support Complexity Weekend, really the most meaningful support you can provide is

voting with your attention and by showing up and participating and then by giving us feedback on the program.

It does have a feedback link and we'll also email that out.

But that's super helpful because we're cybernetic and we're always trying to improve and calibrate and make participation better and more accessible.

You can also support us at a PayPal link or via cryptocurrency.

Just ask us and

Financial transparency can be provided, but your contributions basically go towards sustaining our events in deep time by paying for online event platform bandwidth, honorariums for facilitators at the weekend, not for the heartbeat, and in the future, providing sort of scholarships and micro grants.

So at this time, we're going to go to a Jamboard.

So I'm going to copy that into the live stream chat, as well as it being in the program.

And just while Jen is joining, it's that post-it note where you can post a note to the Jamboard.

Greetings.

Greetings, Jen.

Yes.

Hello.

And you can.

Yes, we can hear you.

So that's what the Jamboard looks like.

Okay, Blue, you can switch over.

Yes, great.

Switch over to the Jamboard.


SPEAKER_03:
I think I'm doing it.


SPEAKER_00:
And we will meet everybody on the second Jamboard slide in just a second.

How goes it, Jen?


SPEAKER_01:
Pretty good.

How goes it with you?


SPEAKER_00:
Having fun being in the passenger seat.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, my gosh.

Just don't look.

I've had the live stream on like whatever and I'm sorry that I'm looking a little informal, but it is so hot right now in Seattle so It is like it's gonna be roasting before this day is over So I think we're expecting it to get to 109 tomorrow which is crazy because nobody owns an air conditioner here and

So what global climate change?

I don't know.

So everybody's just trying to figure out, like I ordered a dog, a kiddie pool for my dogs.

So, I mean, my weekend is going to be like managing my dogs, making sure they don't get overheated along with doing complexity weekend.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Blue, you could, um,

Re-crop the Jitsi a little bit and yep sounds and then pull back a little bit on the Jamboard.

So the first slide, slide two, what is your intention today?

So maybe Jen, you can go first then I'm happy to go.


SPEAKER_01:
This was such a fascinating question.

So I was previewing the Jamboard the other day.

I'm so fascinated by this question of

know how we bring intentions to stuff you know i'm here to like my focus this weekend is to uh help people make connections so like that's where my intentions are is how can i facilitate people making kind of meaningful connections and connecting to each other especially um but also like connecting to the material but mostly i want to focus on helping people connect to each other and find each other because there's always so many interesting people

And it's actually really hard sometimes to find people that you want to talk to.

Because you'll hear about one person had one conversation.

And then you're like, oh, I would love to meet a person like that.

And then the weekend might be over.

So we're trying to focus on bringing people together in more ways.

So that's where my intentions are.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

That sounds awesome.

I think I'll second that and also just, it's only been one month since the weekend.

And so I want to learn and figure out how the heartbeat kind of, what's that first pump after the weekends?

Just like Blue said, with bringing a team together, maybe you haven't spoken, but it's only been a month, and projects take time.

So how can a heartbeat be something that re-energizes teams and relationships that already know each other, as well as an opportunity for new teams and participants to meet each other?

So here's a few, and you might want to turn off

the night mode loop, there's decompressing via stimulating conversations.

Learn more about complexity and complexity weekends.

Reconnect with teammates and form new relationships.

Reconnect emerging conversations, input and fun.

Learn and get more involved.

These are awesome thoughts.

How are you doing over there, Blue?


SPEAKER_02:
I'm good.

I turned off night mode, so I'm not sure if I can fix it.


SPEAKER_00:
It's still legible on the livestream.

How is intention related to complex systems?


SPEAKER_01:
That's almost a question for Blair, the neuroscientist.


SPEAKER_02:
I don't know.

I think intention really sets the stage, right?

So I mean, everything that is manifested in the world is manifested through imagination, first of all, right?

So I imagine that this is possible.

It can happen.

And then second of all, through intention.

Like, I will make this happen, whatever the thing might be.

So I don't know.

For me, intention is a big one.


SPEAKER_00:
Very true.

We're still like, just keep an eye on the OBS to make sure that it's not like obscured with different pieces.

I think for a goal seeking system, for an anticipatory system, something like intention must exist.

One can't just be walking backwards and looking only at the past, because even if you had access to, for example, the total data related to a market or your own past behavior through time, you still would be in the dark as to what is upcoming.

And so intention is

something that cybernetic or goal-seeking systems need in order to stay aligned with the future because there's always going to be uncertainty in what comes up.

So intention helps transmute that uncertainty, allow us to act, and hopefully have our action aligned with our values.

So cool thoughts.

Anything else on this one or do we want to go to the next one?


SPEAKER_02:
I moved.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, great.


SPEAKER_01:
I'm getting coffee delivery here.


SPEAKER_02:
Oh, how nice.

Awesome.

So who are you and how did you discover complexity?

This is our next slide.

So Daniel, tell me, who are you and how did you discover complexity?

Now you get to be the hot seat.

How does it feel?


SPEAKER_00:
It's burning.

Well, I'm a researcher and I can't remember exactly how I discovered complexity, but one early moment was just pipetting in a biology lab and having somebody suggest a few different books that I could read about and mentioning, of course, Santa Fe Institute.

And that just sort of connected some of the cool stuff that we were working on in a biology lab to research.

broader questions that were super fascinating related to just how systems with many subunits interact.

And that was just the beginning of tracing out what complexity was.

What about you, Jen?


SPEAKER_01:
Me?

You know, I feel like I tell this story like every complexity weekend.

And I feel like my complexity journey started with being like that weird kid at recess.

and uh like i spent i feel like i spent a lot of time like laying in like you know not like playing kickball but like laying in the field and staring at the blades of grass and like up with the really high clouds in the sky and trying to understand where this order was coming from because it was also different every single time too um

And I think that's really where it started for me is just trying to understand where this is coming from.

And then, you know, we have this this zeitgeist kind of out in the popular world before I was a scientist.

About chaos theory and I was really fascinated by that and like kind of bringing these ideas together so I could see that people were talking about this and So I actually took a break from school and had to go back and redo my bachelor's over again And it was there when I was working on my bachelor's That somebody kind of threw out a paper from Santa Fe.

I think was on human evolution I can't remember what it was, but it was kind of like the

In the department that I was in, it was like, this is interesting.

We don't really know what to do with it, but it seems like you might be the kind of person who would really get something out of this.

And so I think that's where like connecting to like, you know, just into the literature that was coming out of Santa Fe Institute was where kind of like my doorway into the more formal world of complexity science.

And yeah, so it's hard though, because I think in a lot of fields, or at least in my field, which I'm an anthropologist, there's a lot of people who kind of don't know what to do with it and don't know how to implement it.

I think some fields it is easier to get into and integrate earlier and some fields are just kind of confused.

I think there's so much potential and possibility.

Like I really feel that this is,

a paradigm change in terms of uh how we think about organizing understanding the world so it's hard for people to get into sometimes at first because it is so immense and so um

i think challenging to world views but it is so incredibly like once you start to see it you're like oh yeah i get it like you can start to see how it's functioning all around you so you know like where social networks and how they work i think we've had this great experiment and how social networks work really practically over the last year and a half of pandemic and how disease spreads right

So we've all kind of gotten an education in that.

So yeah, so yes, I'm deeply into how humans evolved and I think it's a useful set of tools for kind of answering a lot of those questions.

Anyways, so you know me.


SPEAKER_02:
What do you think, Blue?

I don't know.

I read all the books, but no one told me that complexity science was a formal study.

I had read books by James Glick, I had read Chaos, and I read Blink, and I was studying all this stuff, and then I was in my doctorate, really deep into it.

I was like, I am not fitting my science into this box that you have created for my science.

I'm sorry it doesn't fit.

And it was like, I'm looking at the exchange of neurons and glia, which is very taboo.

I mean, especially years ago, it's becoming more accepted.

But how can glia become neurons?

Is this even possible?

And stem cell differentiation, stuff like that.

So I was playing around in these gray areas.

And I was just really frustrated with the paradigm and you can't publish a paper that goes against the grain.

If a cell has this marker, it's this kind of cell.

But I'm like, there is no black and white.

There is a continuum of gray here.

It's not that simple, right?

So that's what where I started to research myself Like what do people do when the science is too complicated, right?

Like when the science is too complicated then what happens when you have these wicked problems?

And so then I researched myself discovered the Santa Fe Institute and applied and went that summer so Yeah, anyway, that was my kind of adventure You know


SPEAKER_01:
I'm sorry, I want to amplify what you're talking about is, you know, because also, you know, the stuff that I do is continuous variability and that we create distinct categories.

um to just to help us understand systems like i i get why we do it you know we don't need to look at every single mushroom and go like is this one edible will this one make me see god is this one going to kill me within 15 minutes like we need to have categories um to help us get through the world but i think a lot of times we mistake our categories for the way the world actually is

and not a tool for solving a question.

And I think that that sort of mental slide is, I mean like that's for me where the fundamental challenging worldview is, is to actually see the continuous variability.

And so it sounds like our neurons are doing the same thing as they're actually all continuous variability and we get upset when they don't stay in their categories.


SPEAKER_00:
One interesting thing here is it's a very common trajectory in the past to either have something endogenous, like inside of ourself, being curious about order and disorder, like you pointed out, or getting inspired by the world that we see, like people talking about getting obsessed with Epcot, finding Buckminster Fuller, or finding research institutes or books.

And the piece of the puzzle that really hasn't quite been there as much

might be like a community that helps people on board and just what happens if you read a book and then the book isn't like totally making sense?

Where do you go from there?

Well, likely just resume back into the mainstream.

And so hopefully with Complexity Weekend, we can provide a way that people can be learning about complexity and knowing that there's going to be a social scaffolding that helps them be supported in their journey.

Do you want to go to slide four?

So here we have complexity, learning, and applying.

So what does just this make either of you think about or wonder?


SPEAKER_02:
just the core values like learning by doing, right?

So if you can't

you can't just learn from a book.

And that's the thing about the community also, right?

Like I read all the books.

There was no, like, nobody said like, this is its own like science and its own field and its own community.

And so having the community, getting a chance to apply the knowledge that you're reading in the books or on the website or whatever, wherever you find it, having that chance to apply the knowledge really makes a difference in your ability to learn it.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

I always feel like,

I used to work in technology also, and kind of the rule of thumb is if you had to master a new skill set, it's the fastest way to do it.

If you wanted to learn how to use Python, the fastest way to learn how to use Python is to actually do something, actually do a project.

So I always find the applying, uh, is super useful for the learning part is like you, you actually see where the rubber hits the road and how the mechanics of it play out.

So I'm thinking now, so now I'm trying to flip it and think about how the learning applies to the applying.

So, you know, I'm very used to like that problem focused learning model.

Uh, and it definitely works for me.

I know it's not a universal, like, you know, strategy, but it works for a lot of people.

So.

Um, um, yeah, so, but I think that the, uh, the learning process, like having the opportunity to interact with the people and their different perspectives creates opportunities.

for new ways to apply stuff too.

And like to kind of get out of our bias.

Sometimes we're just like, oh, this little method only applies to my specific field.

And when you can see how that pattern, like that method pattern can actually be useful across different domains.

I think that opens up opportunities for more applications.

So I think that's always one of the biggest things out of complexity for me.


SPEAKER_00:
When I hear you feedback on chat side.

It says feedback loops there on the Jamboard and

That's an example of like learning while applying.

It's like, what's a feedback loop?

Oh yes, you have a cyber physical system and now there's an audio feedback loop, but applying can be like a coat of paint.

We learn an idea and that sort of updates our understanding a little bit about that idea.

And then we apply it through seeing a situation differently.

So for example, everyone has heard when the microphone goes near the speaker and there's a sound that comes out.

but now we can connect.

Oh no, not anymore.

But now we could connect that and say, actually, you know, when Jen just asked me if that was still happening and then I provided feedback.

So that wasn't the microphone of the speaker.

It wasn't just a signal that was caught in a feedback loop, but there's social feedback.

So then what is similar or what is different when you're thinking about feedback loops and could there be a graphical representation that would cover those two cases?

Or is there a problem that can be solved in one domain that's more challenging in another domain?

Where is it easy to dampen feedback?

Or what are the ways that if you want to amplify feedback but not have it get out of control, how do you design those processes?

And so that's sort of like learning by applying.

You don't need to have...

a startup before you can be applying complexity or have a research question that is gonna be in some journal.

We can all apply it by how we look at the world around us.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool, anything else?


SPEAKER_00:
Just that in Complexity Weekend, this access slash continuum, it's something where we're all just going to be strangely dancing around.

So whether one day you want to be more on one side or on another side, or you want to learn from somebody else or help mentor someone else, just there's space for that.

And there's a lot of ways to be on this slide.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

I think one of the great things is that there is not a lot of hierarchy, which can be confusing, you know, like you're not going to a class.

to hear, you know, to be given a task and hear an instructor.

We've got facilitators there for building the community and we're, you know, hopefully bumping into each other and forming little groups, which is actually kind of a lot like our evolutionary history of kind of forming these groups, you know, as hunter-gatherers, you know, hundreds of thousands of years ago, we

you know, we formed groups that we hung out together and we were free to leave them and go join other groups.

And there was leadership for tasks maybe,

but people changed roles within that group all the time.

So I think that that's like, you know, a lot of times we're very used to being in these structured top-down hierarchies, but this, I think, community gives us a chance to be very flexible in our roles.

And so that, yeah, so we can't emerge, like people can suddenly become the teacher in a casual conversation because they know something that other people don't know, even if

they're feeling like, you know, like that might be an unusual role for them.

So I think that's just in terms of the learning aspects and the being in community aspects.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Let's go to slide number five.

And just in case anyone is not seeing how to transfer, like on the top bar of the Jamboard, there's a right and a left arrow.

So just move over to slide five, where it says relating complexity science with our complex environments.

Where do we see complexity?

Might as well ask where we don't see it, but we've gotten many awesome answers from the past.

This is just a subset of them.

Where do we see complexity playing out?

As the middle of 2021, Zoom is by us.

Where do we see complexity that we might not have seen it before?


SPEAKER_01:
These are some great examples that we already have.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I think like getting back into reality, like, do I wear a mask?

Do I not wear a mask?

Am I vaccinated?

Like, am I going to pretend to be vaccinated?

Like, there's this like, am I a child under the age of 12?

Like, do I have to make my kids wear masks?

Like, there's this whole level of like reintegration that is maybe we're seeing complexity as a society at large.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I was actually traveling last weekend.

So I live in Seattle and I was in DC.

And Seattle and DC have two really different kind of public vibes on the mask wearing versus not mask wearing.

Like DC is basically back to being plain old open for business.

So being from Seattle and being acculturated to Seattle habits, I was constantly like walking into places and I would still have my mask on.

for much longer.

And I would be like, oh, now I feel awkward and out of place.

I am not adhering to the cultural norms of my immediate environment, this bar.

And I am fully vaccinated.

But that's not 100%.

I think it's going to be very interesting to see how kind of the next phase of this pans out.

I think there's going to be a lot more heartbreak, sadly, for all of us.

As much as there's been such amazing advances with the vaccines getting out so quickly and so forth.

So we'll see.

It's definitely a lot of complexity at play there.

But yeah, it's interesting how the social norms go.

So on the planes, pretty much everybody wears their masks.

Although I noticed the guy sitting next to me in the seat had one of the disposable paper masks, which is fine, but he kept it below his nose.

uh and every time the the attendant walked by down the aisle because they were coming by and being like please put your mask up he he managed to always have his head down on his tray table taking a nap whenever she came by to remind people to put their pull their masks up so i think there's there's some interesting stuff going on out there how people are negotiating the world and that's those tiny little

adaptations like, oh, I'm going to wear the mask, but I'm going to breathe through my nose and keep the mask below my nose.

Like, how is that going to play out?

Because that's such a tiny little, like, change in the public health.

And like, it'll be interesting to see how that creates larger effects down the road.

Because, you know, that's what we know is that small changes in initial conditions can have outside effects later on.

So...


SPEAKER_00:
Nice one last point here before we go to six is just like written here, all kinds of markets and interactions across types of systems.

So we've kind of seen like arbitrage or transfer between information and memes and markets being responsive on a 24 hour cycle.

And so it's not just like we're dealing with complexity in one system, just in agriculture, just in epidemiology, just in politics.

We're starting to see how changes in one domain

instantly can have effects in a different domain.

A light switch goes off somewhere and then now a computer is insecure.

Those kinds of cross-domain cases are really complexity's opportunity to step into the gap.

And it also highlights the importance of having transdisciplinary teams and recognizing people's

expertise across areas because how are we going to be able to manage or sense make those connections between areas unless at a micro level we can have relationships and shared understanding and shared words and a lot of great answers here.

So let's go to six and kind of think about Complexity Weekend as a complex system.

What kinds of participant behaviors and norms can help us make Complexity Weekend an amazing space?

So we have two sides here, things that we do want to see happen and things that we want to avoid.

So this is kind of like those charged plates, like a positive and a negative plate.

How will we steer towards the kinds of participation that will be important?

accessible and engaging and just also not act like it's 100% just sunshine and what are the kinds of behaviors that we might want to avoid.

I'm curious, just from our past weekend, what do you think that we've learned or what's something we've taken away on either of these sides since we were all facilitators in May?


SPEAKER_01:
I think

With facilitation particularly, I find some of the most amazing surprises comes from people who are feeling very shy about their knowledge or their engagement, like sometimes feeling intimidated, is that they can often have really breakthrough moments that can really provide a lot of insight to the whole group.

So I think one thing that we always want to see is

even if you're feeling, you know, like you're too much of a beginner to make a contribution is to just go ahead and participate and chances are you're going to bring some amazing stuff that other people are going to really value.

So I think that's always something that I want to see is just to encourage people to really get in there and participate and

And then for things that we want to avoid, I know I can really go on and on and on and on.

And for me, I always have to try and focus on making space for those other people who may not be feeling quite so confident so that they can feel more comfortable participating.

So those are some I guess those are my two things from my experience.


SPEAKER_02:
So I have some some things so things we want to see I mean this is the point of complexity weekend is cross-pollination like we want to bring different disciplines together different people together from all different backgrounds and places in the world for exchange open exchange of ideas and

So I think it's important to remember that open exchange of ideas is encouraged and the norm in this kind of environment.

But at the same time, if there's an expectation for not going and giving some other group's idea out or giving away some data or giving away some key secret to their project, if there's that expectation, I think it's important to make it clear.

So that people don't go giving away, you know, other people's ideas or secrets or whatever.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, we're all co-discovering and really co-creating norms for how do you go from an exciting conversation into a research project or into the pipeline for a startup or something like that?

And how do we balance that?

conveying information openly while also respecting privacy and respecting intellectual property so there's some great answers here so like um on the things we want to see we have yes and and then on the avoid we have the exclusive or and complexity is kind of the and space it's like there's thermodynamics and there's social scientists like it's not that one of those is going to be driving the boat um

getting connected after the weekend, totally.

Complexity weekend is just a catalyst for people to be in the world the way that they want to be individually, relationships, teams, et cetera.

Things that we want to avoid, these are really important.

So heated conflict or condemnatory behaviors, for sure people can let organizers know if anything is rising to their attention or if there's anything that they're a little concerned about, that's great.

getting lost in the details.

We know that complexity is a large area.

So that's why we kind of cruise together because then it's not just about the details because there are so many papers and there's so much technical things to get lost in.

Newbies having trouble finding how and where to interact.

This is something that we can always use people's assistance in.

Everybody can bring that kind of organizer slash facilitator energy, like encouraging the sharing of perspectives for those who aren't speaking, like, hey, we haven't heard from this person in a few minutes.

What are they thinking about right now?

As well as you see somebody who's trapped in a corner and gather or something, can you help them out?

And then if this is something that you want to actually go from just suggesting feedback to helping us, like, could we have on our website the program instead of a Google Doc?

Or could we have a welcoming committee where 24 hours a day somebody can drop in and have a conversation with somebody to check their audio visual?

Those are...

opportunities and roles for people who want to be in a co-organizer type position.

So all of these are super valuable feedback and the heartbeat organizers always look at them when they're planning the next month's events.

And then also this is your opportunity to kind of bring that meme to the front by you being a co-organizer.

Let's go to the next slide, seven.

And we're going to go to seven.

And then this will actually be the last one because Jen, your facilitator session is going to have a lot of like team building elements.

Is this correct?


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Meeting each other and spitballing ideas and connecting with each other.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

Awesome.

So seven, how can complexity have impact in real world systems through its application or lack of application, understanding, lack of understanding, and then where and how have you successfully applied complexity or seen it be applied?

What would you say to that?

Right.


SPEAKER_01:
Dead silence.


SPEAKER_00:
Silence can be good.

Always awesome to have time to think.


SPEAKER_02:
I think complexity science really is one of the ways that we can really solve the biggest problems in the world, like climate change and deforestation and wealth concentration.

All of these things approached through complexity science methods are very integrative and can really show

kind of the bigger picture, it's like the zoom out, you know, the inclusive rather than the reductionist perspective kind of gives more of a perspective on the wicked problems in the world.

Not that I've successfully applied it to solve any wicked problems, but I've successfully applied it to, I don't know, write some papers and do some fun research, so...


SPEAKER_01:
yeah definitely for me i mean again i i've been more in the the research end of things and less on the uh practical applications but i'm you know always looking to to make that pivot um for me you know my research is about how does technology and uh uh human environment interactions like how do they all interact with each other because you know our changes in technology um

Impact the environment and this goes back to very you know, this is a very deep time question with how we might Manage the landscape to Create opportunities for different plants means probably removing some plants like through fire That's like one of the oldest methods for humans managing the landscape, but that can have some some very big You know global implications

Uh, depending on how it's done and then how our technology is very, usually pretty closely linked to how we get food, at least in the archeological record.

Um, you know, now technology is kind of gone through some phase transitions and it's its own kind of elaborating system in of itself, but it's still linked to this interaction between humans and our environment.

Right.

And so I think that there's lessons to be learned out of this, you know, even out of these kind of esoteric research questions that can be brought forward into tackling, you know, instead of just looking in the past, which is, you know, I'm an archeologist, I look a lot in the past, but being able to then pivot and then look forward to the future and say, how do I apply these lessons learned?

And so I think that there's a lot of opportunity out there.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

I think that,

We're all from research areas and just being able to apply complexity to our projects, which are often between different disciplines.

connecting different silos.

It's something we heard Dave Snowden talk about in the keynote just a month ago, is we don't need to destroy silos.

We just need to think about how to connect them.

That's how we'll go both broad and deep.

And there's some awesome answers here.

So decreasing zero sum dynamics,

definitely taking a game theory perspective and just asking like, hey, are there incentives in this system where even well-intentioned people are penalizing each other?

Or is there anything where it is like a lose-lose game?

How can we make a win-win game?

Created multiple online communities.

So that's definitely an application learning by doing.

Risk analysis and improving the quality and the clarity of goals.

Going back to our earlier discussion on intention.

Complexity helps give us a framework for goal seeking and for planning as inference that isn't just hand waving.

And hands can still be waved, but we also know that there's something underlying that is going to be connecting us to all kinds of scientific approaches as well.

Improved understanding of virology, human social systems, physics, software, zooming out in all the scientists.

Not sure if this is the Bucky Fuller person, but zooming out and zooming in, that's something that Bucky talked a lot about and about pullback to where those little tiny differences between the disciplines just are trivial.

And then we can zoom in to where the finest subtleties can be contrasted.

Learning computational approaches, design, and now complexity thinking.

That's the trifecta for them.

Those are all awesome areas, and it's been exciting as we develop and grow the community that complexity is something where a lot of people think, oh, but I'm not in complexity, but I am in biomimicry, or I am in design, or I am in organizational psychology.

I am in climate science, public health.

It's like, great.

That's great.

That's where you are.

And then welcome to Complexity Weekend, where we can connect across those similarities and differences.

Any other things here?

Otherwise, I think this has been a fun live stream.

Blue, epic work.


SPEAKER_02:
I learned a lot.

That's good.

Learning by doing.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

So with that, we'll just remind people that the program is where they can always check back to for the updated scheduling and just, you know, bear with us as our volunteers, organizers and participants sort of roll with the uncertainty.

We're going to take about a 10 minute break and then at 15 minutes after the hour,

We will meet you in the gather space, and that's where Jen's session will begin and where the rest of the heartbeat will continue.

So to the co-organizers, Sean and Blue, great work.

Blue, first of many live streams, I know.

And thanks for joining also, Jen.

Always a pleasure.


SPEAKER_02:
See you in a little bit.

Don't forget to respawn and gather.