SPEAKER_04:
okay hello everyone welcome to the beginning of the middle live stream for complexity weekend 2022 in april we're going to get started in about 25 minutes we're going to listen to 25 minutes of some michael garfield music and then we will have the middle organizers live stream so enjoy the next 20 minutes of music and see you pretty soon


SPEAKER_00:
Woo-hoo!


UNKNOWN:
so so

so

Thank you.

Thank you.

Wow.

Thank you.

so

Thank you.


SPEAKER_04:
hey how's my hair we can't hear you still daniel looks awesome michaela thank you hey blue hey michaela good day and uh welcome everyone to the middle live stream so just as people are loading in and posting this link and so on how goes it goes very well


SPEAKER_02:
I like it that daytime too.

No, this is middle of the day for me and I'm very happy to be back for day two.


SPEAKER_04:
Almost daytime where I am.

Cool.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

Sun is rising here.

So also happy to be back for day two and just happy to see everyone so excited and interacting so well.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay, so we will be hanging out in this middle live stream for a little bit, and there's going to be a few parts to it.

The first part is going to be going through some slides on teams and talking about a few different aspects of teams in a pretty informational way.

The second part, we're going to look at the participant single source of truth.

And that will help you get familiar with the way that the team's journey and the discovery and filling out the forms is going to look for you on the participant side.

And then in the third part, we're going to hop over to the same Jamboard that we've been using previously and just sort of

have some fun conversations maybe a little bit about teams about about anything that we want to do so let's begin with talking a bit about the team process overview and then we'll go to the participant single source of truth so this is going to be about the team's process in complexity weekend

And there's a few things that we're going to discuss.

First is just the overview of the team's process and formation.

Then some aspects of team formation during the weekend and how that happens synchronously and asynchronously, including starting a team and finding a team.

We'll look at the team registration forms and then about different ways to participate during the weekend as a team and the co-working spaces.

And then

about what one can do to prepare their team for the closing live stream on Sunday and beyond.

So why form teams?

I can definitely give a thought, but Makila or Blue, what is one reason that you've always known or that maybe appeared in a new light in this weekend of why we formed teams?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, I think teams are very useful in order to get some progress done on a specific issue if you so develop one during the complexity weekend.

It can also be perennial after each weekend.

And I think that's the main interest of it is having a team that is not synchronous with the weekend.

So that's my main advantage I see.

I don't know about you, Blue.

You're more experienced with teams than I am.


SPEAKER_03:
I don't know if that's true.

But I think for me, a team is like, if you have a project and you want to get it done,

having a team like provides additional like fuel for the fire.

I mean, not just because it's extra like manpower, because sometimes you have like different skills.

But for me, it's like, it provides the motivation and accountability to keep pushing forward.

So even like if you had like an exercise partner, like, you know, that you met every day at the gym, and it's like, if you, you know, it's easy to blow it off.

But, you know, if you're meeting someone there,

then that's a little bit more difficult because you have that accountability and someone else depending on you to get your work done.

So for me, that's kind of the main reason.

I would never go forward or do half the things I do if I didn't have to do them by a certain day for my team.


SPEAKER_04:
Yes, thanks for sharing this.

On the slide, we have a bit about the values and how they are embodied in teams with the value of learning and applying complexity by doing and by connecting with different perspectives that will happen on a team.

And it almost is like necessary and sufficient for being on a team.

And as mentioned with this increased ability to have impact, that complex problems often require diverse teams to have positive long-lasting impact.

And then also,

Complexity weekend, all things considered, is a very austere rhythm of events.

Yes, it sounds like it'd be an amazing, a lot of time to participate in two weekends and in 10 heartbeats each year, but that would only be a few total days of activity.

And so it's about what's happening in the backdrop with your life.

And this is like a convening space where we're coming and finding new teams and finding new inspiration.

But there's work to be done beyond the conversation that happens in the cafe stand here.

And so this is like a space where we come together and we're exposed to some new information.

We connect some dots in a new way.

We reconnect, hopefully, with our community.

complexity, curiosity, and the problems that we're interested in.

And then in the next month, what can you do?

And what could you share at the heartbeat in the next month?

And then in the next weekend, six months from now, how could you come back in a different way?

And how could your team have done something significant in those

months, even if it is just, we met this many times, or we consensed on a very short piece of writing, or we decided to start up a, you know, whatever it happened to be.

So these are some of the reasons why we formed teams.

And of course, just in the live chat or however else, let us know, like, why would you form teams?

Okay, so let's return to the weekend schedule in terms of just the overview of participation.

So in the first part of the weekend, we had an opening welcome live stream that gave an overview of Complexity Weekend in more of an organizational capacity.

And we talked about some of the roles in Complexity Weekend.

And right after that ended, we started with a one-on-one session, which is like a time for unstructured conversation and connecting on the edges, meeting different participants.

And then right after that,

we began this rhythm where in alternating hours there was live facilitated sessions and then more of a facilitated teaming and office hours session and so that's been continuing from right after the opening live stream till right up till now this is like the little island oasis we're in the desert oasis with caitlin blue how wild is that um sprouting out of that alternating desert

Here's the middle live stream or more like the 40% live stream.

And then we're going to resume this rhythm of alternating up until almost the end, almost the closing live stream when there'll be a few hours set aside more specifically for team development.

and during especially now whenever you're listening to this live stream live or replay till the close on sunday that is like a time where if you want to it's the time to be pushing ahead with your team so that's what this live stream and this discussion is about and we're going to cover a lot of

questions about teams and also like what the actual documents will look like when you're going through the team process.

And on the Sunday closing live stream, some teams will present live or with a prerecorded video.

And that's sort of their,

rocket fuel or whatever it is as they head off again into that next phase of actually doing the work, whether they come back at the next heartbeat or the next weekend or never.

So just to remind of the schedule and the program before we now go a little bit more into the how and the why of teams.

Blue, anything to add on this?


SPEAKER_01:
No.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay, great.

So let us look at a few frequently asked team questions.

And these are things that have come up in the iterations of Complexity Weekend.

And if you have a question that you'd like asked, we can also add this to the slide and add this to the information.

So to save us all the embarrassment of reading this in different voices,

we'll just read it normally as if it was one person asking themself.

So can anyone join or start a team?

Yes.

Anyone is welcome to join as well as to start a team.

The way that one would start a team is by filling out the team seed form.

or just by having a conversation with a facilitator.

And one can join a team by looking at the page, the teams that exist, the See Existing Teams page.

And we're going to look at that in just a few minutes.

But yes, if you're listening to this, this is about you and your curiosity in joining a starting team.

There's no other requirement.

If you're listening to it, this is something that you can get involved in.

Who can participate on a team?

Anyone that your team wants to include can participate because it's up to your team to determine how you want to actually move things forward, schedule, what platform do you want to use for chat?

Do you want to use Keybase for chat and Gather for video and Coda for documents like we're using in this cohort?

Or do you want to do something totally different?

It's all good.

That's not up to Complexity Weekend.

That's up to you.

i have to join a team or be on a team of any kind to be in complexity weekend no complexity weekend's a community of practice where people are on many different ways and stages in the complexity journey so there's no requirement to be on a team it is something that we want to make and hold a space for but it is not something that's required at all to be a continual part of complexity weekend

I'm just going to go through all these for a first pass and then Blue or Mikaela, feel free to add any points.

When do teams form?

Teams are forming before as well as after the weekend, but especially during the weekend when people are most likely to be synchronously available, like in Gather, or checking Keybase and Active that way.

And also many teams, again, that continue after the weekend, it's not like they close their doors.

There's always a need and an openness for participants who are ready to be active and learning and contributing, even with just asking beginners questions.

you need to continue with your team after the weekend no there's no requirements on teams but it's something that it's cool to have instantaneous teams are awesome flash mob teams and then they will we'll do one meeting and then we'll disassemble forever by next week and it's also great to have a bit of a sustained impact and lastly how do i start or find a team

So asynchronous, just meaning whenever you want to, you can go to the Coda and look at the Teams pages, which we're gonna do in a few minutes.

You can also post in the other asynchronous tool, Keybase, the chat platform in the I Need a Team channel.

And that's where everybody who is going to be wanting to find a team or help you do that is gonna be there.

And then synchronously, the way to find a team or learn more is just to show up in Gather.

Okay.

Blue or Michaela, what are some other relevant points or things you'd add here?


SPEAKER_03:
So Coda is like a new tool for Complexity Weekend.

And I know it's like still a new tool for me in my life, but I just want to kind of encourage everyone to leave their brain dump in Coda so that other people can find it.

So Keybase is...

It is what it is, and we've used it for a long time.

But threading is really a problem.

And it's easy to lose track of conversations or ideas.

And Coda is much more organized and efficient.

And, I mean, there's tons of space in Coda.

If you don't feel comfortable leaving your information on the Teams page, start a new page.

So I just want to kind of encourage people to use that.

to find each other or to share ideas or to maybe find some common ground because it's really quite useful.


SPEAKER_04:
Michaela?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I have participated in several complexity weekends now and have never been a member of a team.

So it's possible also to be not in a team and to kind of seed teams and then let them live their life outside of your first input.

So anything goes.

Just go for however you feel comfortable and participate in the way that's good for you.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks for sharing that.

And it's like complex systems with history and initial conditions.

Just being in the space and asking a question can be like a...

early pebble on the ant colony that another team will develop so just being there is meaningful and i also just blew how did your coda session go with rj and what are some ways that you're seeing like coda involved in team formation so the coda session with rj was super fun um it's


SPEAKER_03:
really need to kind of push the boundaries or the limits of a platform and see all the things that it can do and also kind of learn some of the things that it can't do or that it's not really great at and so I don't I haven't seen Coda in team formation very much yet but I do think it

can be like, like I've seen a lot of chatter in the key base.

I haven't been over to the Coda this morning, so I'm just waking up.

Perhaps a lot of stuff has gone on since my Coda session or since, um, it overnight.

I haven't been over there this morning.

I'm just drinking coffee here.

So just waking up, but, uh,

I do think... I've seen a lot of chatter in Keybase that I think would be awesome if it was in Coda because it's more searchable, findable, threadable, collapsible.

It's just a more dynamic platform that just offers more utility.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

Thanks.

Let us look into about participating in CW as a team.

So...

participating as an individual of course anyone is always welcome to be just showing up synchronously or asynchronously but what are a few ways that teams can go also beyond that and participate so one option is the team can do a bit of a divide and conquer or divide and appreciate or mitos and enjoy maybe we need like a different way to describe that um in the sense like if there's two facilitated sessions happening at the same time

that are both maybe relevant for the team.

The team can sort of coordinate and just communicating with your old or new friends about how you're going to be going through the weekend and what times you're planning to be available can just be like having a friend at a music festival.

Oh, I was thinking of going to this and then that.

so that can just be one fun thing as everybody navigates this alternation between the opportunity to participate in facilitated sessions as well as the office hours when teams might want to co-work and also balancing this with of course different people's schedules and time zones and health and all of this

as a team it would be awesome and encouraged to post on any of our cohort documents like the coda or the jam board that we'll go into and just let other participants know that you're active you're looking for new participants you're going to be welcoming of having participants get involved and especially if not so long ago

you were just wondering how can i join the team or should i join a team and then it's like if you're on the other side of that little bump then it's awesome to extend a hand back and just remember where one was not so long ago because that's like how we bring people onto teams literally is by making that change in our own thought and action and then making it easier for somebody else to do the same thing and then now there's two people on teams and then off we go

and also teams which can be even a team of one person are welcome to record a video as a team for their closing live stream appearance on sunday if they choose to okay we're going to talk more about the closing live stream but any other thoughts on that


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I think it's quite amazing what kind of teams can evolve from just a conversation at the barista place and then, you know, you go together to one session and you feel common ground with someone and we could something and you kind of imagine what you could collaborate on.

And I've seen so many small teams develop like that just on an impromptu, you know, chat.

And I think that's a great...

strength of complexity we can with all these different disciplines and different diversity of people that kind of you know triggers amazing ideas at every corner where you can bump into someone trying to go around a plant and gather so yeah go around the plants and bump into people instead of doing the opposite don't be a wallflower be a houseplant


SPEAKER_03:
And water the plants while you're there and gather.

Apparently they need watering like every hour and maybe they're going to do something.

Or maybe we just water them to water them.

I don't know.


SPEAKER_04:
Dungeon Master Sean was hinting at some of this earlier.

Cool.

And actually I think perhaps even in this conversation that we have...

let's just see where it goes and then maybe fill out a team seed form or look at the team seed form because like this is how we can take that conversation that's like those sparks of conversation when two perspectives are bumping up against each other and is that going to happen in a cold windy storm

Or is that going to happen in a very nurturing space where somebody brings up a new connection, and then that connection between a complexity idea and an important question in the broader world, and then that edge can be...

scaffolded and that may go many different ways.

So instead of like, wouldn't it be cool?

Or you could think about the internet this way, or we could think about this complexity term applied to this system.

It's like, here's where we're taking that as a starting point.

And teams are about taking that connection as a starting point, not as the end or as some sort of mic drop moment in the conversation.

Even though it may be amazing to hear, it's like actually what motivates us to pick up the next steps.

Okay, so how about a little bit on what the teams do in the closing live streams?

So teams are encouraged, but not required to share during the public closing live stream on Sunday, April 24th.

So this is the middle live stream.

We're going to have another like 28 hours or something until the closing live stream.

So there will be time to work and chill and also to sleep.

And we...

Welcome teams to avoid worrying too much about discussing the specifics of some minimum building or specific solution that one has already locked onto.

And what's awesome to hear about when the teams share is their purpose,

their different perspectives, the kinds of problems and areas that they're starting to explore, some feedback that they've gathered during the weekend from other participants, from facilitators, as well as like from external stakeholders, which is something that Sean Session explores.

some potential solution approaches, even if they're ones that the team feels like there's like a one or like a 0.0001% chance we're gonna pursue this.

This isn't a blog writing project, this isn't a book club, this isn't a startup, this isn't a research grant, but like at least those are on the table, for example.

And really importantly, how the team will continue after the weekend.

And the closing live stream, to whatever extent that's mentioned, it's like the tip of the iceberg because this is an important conversation to have.

Again, like feeling busy and overwhelmed and sometimes challenged by the scope and the type of the problems is our starting point.

We like recognize and resonate with all of that.

And then we ask, well, how can we continue?

Should we then meet monthly?

Should we meet weekly?

Is this something where we're ready to actually meet daily for a certain amount of period of time?

What is the actual schedule and how are we going to fit it together?

How are we going to get it on the calendar and start building like a shared experience in synchronous meetings and or in having our own like asynchronous repository of information?

and depending on the exact number of team sprouts every participating team will be given equal time to share and so any number of team members are welcome to join the live stream to share a presentation so like just as we're here and gather right now team participants will be welcomed up to

present whatever they want to present during that time or another opportunity that is like for those potentially who want to make sure that the presentation that they're giving is the perfect amount of time and things are exactly set as they want to say it's always possible to record a video that we can just play on a live stream

and that's what my facilitated sessions are going to be about so whether you want to record a video or whether you want to join for the live stream live it's always possible to do it or not or form a team and not do that and um that's going to be happening in the team sprouting form which we're going to talk about in just the next section of this stream any other thoughts on the closing live stream


SPEAKER_02:
It's always a lot of fun.

It's in the middle of the night for me.

I try to stay up to watch it.

And then I just collapse because it's really good to see everything that came out of these conjunct efforts for three days.

And it's really lots of fun.

And it's not too serious, but you can see seeds that are cool to see how they pursue into the next complexity weekend sometimes.

It's lots of fun.

I love it.

Awesome.


SPEAKER_03:
We're missing the storming, norming, performing.

Am I missing one of those things?

But giving your team a chance to perform is good because it helps solidify your ideas and it really kind of locks you into your different styles and helps you key into your other group members and maybe some people are more...

step back or or like prefer to be in the spotlight or it just kind of helps you I don't know get to know each other in that kind of way also


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

So just one note on the timing was it's one amazing and fun thing about live streams is that it can be a way to participate live.

So like the bunch of people who I see watching live, you can ask questions in the live chat and be part of the conversation and the feedback live.

And it's also archived and recorded so that somebody who's just watching

sleeping or not available right now they can watch this later they can pause it or they could watch it on 2x and they can watch it or they can listen to it and it will be something to revisit and yeah i totally agree mikhail like the the juxtaposition of the different teams and then it's just like well at complexity weekend there might have been a conversation about topic a here and topic b here

And so that's just like at a cafe, there'd be conversations about different things.

But then imagine if there was a little lightning talks round and everybody at the cafe shared, all of a sudden it'd be like, wow, there was a lot of interesting things happening in this cafe.

And that's sort of what we get to see in...

the Sunday live stream, and it's not the end.

It's not saying, here's what we did over the weekend.

We worked together for 16 hours and we didn't sleep.

It can sometimes be, we just connected on this.

And again, it's that spark we're gonna nurture.

So just one last slide on how to continue that nurturing beyond Complexity Weekend.

And then we're gonna look at the single source of truth and talk about how this gets down to specifics in the coda.

And then we're gonna go to the Jamboard

Okay.

So taking teams beyond complexity weekend.

So you're going to wake up on April 25th, 2022.

You know, where are my keys?

Where's the coffee?

What are we doing with the team?

The level of commitment with your team is totally up to you.

Everyone is in a different position.

So

There's no single way to participate at all.

So that's just the first note.

That's like the first term in our approximation here is whatever's gonna be right for you is definitely the right way to proceed.

As mentioned earlier,

Complexity Weekend Community of Practice has an annual rhythm where there are weekend cohort based experiences that have like a synchronous and an asynchronous aspect and a weekend long continuous program.

And then there are monthly heartbeats on the other months.

And those are shorter informal events without as much of an asynchronous component and the next heartbeat will be like in just a month.

And so for those who want to join Complexity Weekend committee teams or be an organizer or a facilitator, then Complexity Weekend kind of keeps that rhythm active.

So for people who want to facilitate, organize, or be on a committee team, that's awesome.

We'll talk more about that later.

But what about the teams that participants are driving?

Teams are encouraged to set up a recurring meeting time after the weekend to continue their work.

Teams can meet monthly, every other week, weekly, et cetera.

It really depends on the goal and the timeline.

And many teams go on to achieve goals together over different timelines, launching a website, applying for grants, starting business, writing a peer-reviewed paper together.

So there's many places to head out to initially with your team and many places you can pass through as milestones.

But that...

is the complexity of teams is that there's a lot of inputs a lot of processes and a lot of outputs and still within that there's ways to provide a lot of value and make something really meaningful either blue or michaela or either of your cats


SPEAKER_02:
What I really like is that it's very adaptable to each team's needs and wants.

So some teams, they resolve quickly and some are perennial.

And I think that that's really nice.

And I cannot only stress that

recurring meeting times and dates are probably the only way that you can kind of save your team.

Because we'll meet again and everybody's life is coming in between.

So I think a little bit of structure kind of helps in keeping the team alive.


SPEAKER_03:
My cat says life is lonely without a friend.

So that's what she says.

But I definitely think that

having the regular meetings, however they might be, even if you're just, even if your only commitment is to learning something, are you ever going to read that book chapter?

Are you ever going to read that paper?

Unless like you're going to meet with your team to discuss it at some point.

So I think like, it's hard to motivate yourself to do things if there's not like, for what?

I mean, I mean, I don't know, maybe not everybody, but it's like, I have a list of things I want to accomplish that's infinity long.

So things get reshuffled and prioritized to the top of the list that are someone else's depending on me to make it happen.

And so I think that the regular meetings with your team is really a good way to say, hey, look, I did X, Y, Z or only X in the last week or the last month since we last met.


SPEAKER_04:
One thing that makes me think about is how the real human connections with the team participants and members, it's like the trampoline.

And then we're all juggling different tasks and different pointy objects and heavy objects.

So I'm just imagining if I'm going to work on a team with Blue, and we set up a calendar event, and I said, yes, I'm going to do this by next week or by this date, and it totally doesn't happen, still

that meeting, I could show up and just say, I didn't do this, but let's set aside the 10 minutes and let's just read this right now.

Or like, I'm just here to listen to what the rest of the participants did because I actually didn't get to read even that I didn't have five minutes.

So I didn't get to this short reading.

So that's always okay.

Like to be encompassed in just the humanity of participating together and to just be

around the kernel of the tasks and the work which can be technical or can be arduous just to remember that we're trying to help each other on this journey and so um there's like a lot to say and explore there maybe we can go into more like this human aspect of just being on teams and balancing between basically having a good and a chill individual time

and relationships and teams, but also connecting it to these broader issues.

Like if the team were oriented around improving sustainability from an ecological perspective at complexity weekend, it would be like important to also have impact on the target question, not just, you know, pat each other on the back while, you know,

burning natural resources or something like that so how do we actually do work and also have a good time so we're going to now for the next little bit go to the participant single source of truth in coda and then just to connect the parts that we discussed about teams uh

about different aspects of the team process.

Now we're going to connect that to how it's going to look in Coda.

So Blue, while I'm resizing Windows, just what is interesting or fun about Coda?

Or if we could just take a breath and just like, why is this a cool tool to use?

What is going to be facilitated through using Coda?


SPEAKER_03:
So Coda allows, like, infinity threading, which is really something that Keybase, like, doesn't do.

I mean, like, the Keybase chat leaves a lot to be desired, I think, and a lot of really great ideas get lost there.

So Coda allows, like, indexing.

Like, you can see here all of the different, like, pages that you can do, and you can collapse, or even content within a page you can collapse if you don't want everybody reading it.

So it allows, like,

kind of like gives you a table of contents where to start.

It lets you go back and search for different terms within a document or within documents.

And it's just really like, I don't know, it's multifunctional.

And so Coda essentially is lists of lists of lists with interactive and dynamic content.

And it can, it's not,

based in SQL but it has like the SQL relational database feel and then like it has graphical outputs more like IBM Cognos or Power BI and so it lets you kind of take all of this input like many different kinds of tables and or text and generate output based on that on that text it also has version control which is kind of cool because I've made some big whoops in Coda before then you have to like you know can you restore my version number whatever

So that's cool.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks.

Another take that I have on it is it's a little bit like a cloud document, a little bit like a Google document, because the pages that you have edit access to, like everyone can edit these Explorer channels.

For those pages, it's a lot like editing in another collaborative document.

and it also has that sort of wiki like version control but the idea is that it allows very rich contributions so ranging from you know um things that one might expect from a text program like emojis or different font

and being able to modify font and also to add comments in the margin.

So a lot of text type opportunities with a very low bar.

And also there's some interesting things that happen when you type slash.

You can see many things that you can pull up.

And also when you type at, where you can actually tag a variety of things.

But we'll explore that more.

Let's return to the Teams.

When you enter the PSSOT, the Participant Single Source of Truth, you're gonna land on this welcome letter.

And on the left side, there's like a cabinet of pages that you can leave pulled out with a double arrow, or you can hide that just to focus on the contents of the page.

And you'll see this Teams section.

And this Teams section, and you can also collapse

areas you're not looking at.

This team section has a lot of information that you can asynchronously check out about teams at CW.

So it begins with just a few notes on how you can get involved with teams.

And the top one is actually checking out this specific team's page.

joining team sessions, connecting with participants and participating in the dot teams committee, which was like their awesome work to build this entire team's experience.

And the teams committee operates continuously throughout the years and their deliverable is this team's experience.

So every weekend, we're gonna continue iterating on this team's experience and making it better.

So if you see a way that it could be improved, one way to be part of that feedback loop is by saying something,

And then the next way to get involved in the feedback loop is to be a facilitator or an organizer or on the Teams committee where these kinds of design decisions get made.

So the first page of Teams, the top page, has some writing about Teams at Complexity Weekend.

But let's go directly to Teams processes and then talk about the Teams forms.

So.

Teams.

come from a few different places.

And there's thinking about how the team forms overall, and then how a given individual comes to be involved in a team.

So as far as how a team is created, that could be a team that is just totally arising from scratch out of a new idea that our participant is bringing.

It can also be something that a participant or even a group are already working on.

So a team can already be existing or it can be new.

And it can be a created new team or it can be just new to you.

And so that's going to be like joining a team.

The two phases that we're using in this complexity weekend are the team seeding and the team sprouting.

So here's on this teams processes page in the team formation process section, it describes what these two different phases are, and then we'll look at the forms.

So the first form in the first stage is the team seed form.

That's a general team registration phase.

And what it does is it signals to Complexity Weekend and the community that you are exploring starting a team.

There's no commitment, but it's an amazing opportunity so that your team can be public and welcome new participants in.

So like this is how you make your team or your idea, even your question visible to others who might resonate with it.

Because even just a five second question

if you actually get it to a team seed and complete the form, that might spark so much interest and curiosity from others that, again, even if that one person who asked the question doesn't have one, five, 10 hours a week to move it forward, you really don't know who might have that time.

And then the second form that's filled out and happens later for that team is the team sprouting form.

So we're in this garden, some seeds seed, some sprouts sprout.

And the next phases of growth and development and elaboration, what kind of life form are you?

What kind of fruit is produced?

What kind of vegetation occurs?

All those questions,

they happen later.

This is like just the very early developmental stages of team formation, where we want to go from like open to just enough structure so that there can be joint development going forward.

And in the team sprouting form, the, um,

What it means to sprout in this greenhouse or in this garden context means that the team has made some steps and had some really important conversations about the team's mission approaches.

And the team sprouting form, just like everything at CW, it's totally optional.

but it also does enable the team to participate in the Sunday live stream if they so choose.

And this form has some information about the project and more details about what is hoped to be accomplished.

And it's meant to be filled out together because there's actually like a lot of very important questions and conversations to have.

Blue or Makayla, any thoughts or I can describe a little more.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, definitely.

Um, the catechism.

So I haven't, I think that it's been updated.

I haven't seen the update, but, um, I just wanted to say that the catechism is like, uh, if you can get that part completed, it's like your project is halfway done.

Um, because really it provides like a clear outline and a roadmap for your intentions.

Um, it's super useful.

So, uh, yeah, anyway, I think, um,

Having a roadmap and milestones is really helpful to successful execution of any project.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks.

Let's look at the existing teams.

So let's look at what has been filled out.

And then, Blue, you mentioned Catechism.

Let's talk a little bit about that while we look at the forms themselves.

So this is a cool feature of Coda, is that when people complete those forms...

we're able to have it instantly appearing in the PSSOT.

So these are team seeds that have formed, and then we can just sync this table and we can find teams that have submitted the form and it just adds it to this table.

So that's something that's very cool and helps us like scale the submission and the discoverability of teams.

And this is again in that see existing teams tab under teams.

The first table is teams that have filled out the team seed form.

And what you can see is all of these teams are open to new members.

So this is like where we take like the sort of like cool book, cool link, cool introductory resource, which is a super important conversation to have.

And that's happening in like intro to complexity and in complexity resources and links.

So that conversation is happening, but in C existing teams, this is what applying complexity looks like on teams is with these specific people and projects and teams, or you submitting a seed form.

So,

Michaela, what do you think about maybe like a visual something or maybe there's another seed that we can just really quickly fill out because like we just want to recognize this seed, plant the flag, draw the line in the sand, whatever.

And then we're going to fill this out in just a few minutes and just then others who want to be involved in this sort of visual work can get involved.

So I'll type, but just let me know what to type and let's do this.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, so let's create the team seat that is about new brand and visual identity for CW.

You type like a master.

Very quick.


SPEAKER_05:
You type like the machine.

Oh, I'm typing on 2x mode.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, so what key base username could someone ask if they want to learn more about Particity?

Let's go for me.

That's pelts1.

Awesome.

Excellent.


SPEAKER_05:
So I think, Daniel, you're in there.

I'll just add the email address for Complexity Weekend for this project.


SPEAKER_04:
Sounds good.

What question or issue will your team be addressing?

This should be more than just a topic area, but general enough that it's likely to stay relevant as ideas evolve.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

Create a new brand and create a new visual identity.


SPEAKER_04:
Right.

What are some next directions and intentions that your team will explore?

No need to provide a lot of detail or a final plan, just any ideas about how you will be continuing in the coming days and weeks.


SPEAKER_02:
So we'll go on with facilitated sessions, scheduled facilitated sessions during the weekend.

And we want this to be bottom up and everybody from the community is invited to participate.


SPEAKER_04:
We'll continue with these scheduled facilitated sessions that you're the facilitator for.

It's a bottom-up process.

Everyone is invited to participate.

And then we will continue between the April and September weekends.

Sure.

And absolutely aim to have some deliverables and some improvements that are made in this working group.


SPEAKER_05:
Like, they will be seen and felt in September.

Yes.

Let's put a deadline.

You're right.


SPEAKER_04:
Will be seen and felt in the lead up and weekends of September 2022.

Like, if we can do many things leading up to it.

But you know what?

That's all we need to say.

Are we open to having new team members join the team?

Keep in mind we're inclusive and global community of practice, et cetera.

Yes.

Any skills in particular you would like from a teammate or seek to learn together as part of the project?

So what would be a few relevant skills here?


SPEAKER_02:
The next skills we really will need is visual design, graphicists, creative designers,

know people who can apply ideas onto visual communication but any other profile is welcome but that's something we're looking for are you currently working with any cw facilitators yes are there any facilitators you'd like us to introduce you to i think it's going to be


SPEAKER_04:
organic.

Anything else you'd like the Complexity Weekend team to know or how might we be able to help you?


SPEAKER_05:
We'll let you know if anything comes up.

Right.

And please send everybody to the team.


SPEAKER_02:
Everybody is invited.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.


SPEAKER_02:
Which we're doing right now on this live stream.


SPEAKER_03:
So Michaela, I have a question about your team.

Are people invited to submit just designs?

And if so, to who?


SPEAKER_02:
So today's session will be about visual ideas and we'll have what we like, what we don't like.

And it will be based on what came out of yesterday's session with a few drivers.

I think I can see a very clear driver that Complexity Weekend is a bridge.

So maybe playing with the word bridge and whatever bridging means to people and visually what that could look like, for example, today.

That's the next step.


SPEAKER_03:
Nice.

And tomorrow we'll do.


SPEAKER_04:
May I submit Michaela?

Sure.

Okay.

And blue to the question of like sort of crowdsourcing and seeing people's feedback, like that would be an awesome early direction that we could explore would be like, maybe we can send a mailing list email or post on different platforms.

Like here's the form we will use tomorrow.

reasonable submissions to demonstrate just the creativity and the diversity that people are bringing.

So now I'm gonna go back to see existing teams and not everyone will be able to hit this little sync arrow because not everyone's logged in as ComplexityWeekend at gmail.com, but I have synced and here we are.

So now everybody who's in the PSSOT is gonna be able to see like exactly what this project is

And we all who are watching the live stream just saw like it took just a few minutes and that could have been a conversation that we were having in the cafe.

Like I'm really curious about, you know, this and that applied to here.

And then the facilitator or really anyone stepping into a facilitation energy in that moment is gonna be able to help that team form.

And just in our last minutes of this first part, before we head to the Jamboard, let's just look at the Team Sprout form

and then we won't fill it out but we'll kind of keep in mind like how would we fill this out if we were going to be doing it for the brand and visual identity for complexity weekend project so you know speed up the tape it's 15 hours later we've done a little bit of thinking we've done some sketches on some paper and um now we're going to return as a team

This is like a cooking show.

You know, we put the cake in.

Oh, 25 minutes have passed.

Now we're going to pull out the cake.

Okay, so here we are.

The team sprouting form.

So what is your team or project name?

That would be the same team or project name or just enough to be similar.

We ask who is currently active on your team?

And also, these can all be updated just by letting us know or leaving a comment.

Listing contact information and if there's any key-based contact.

How does your team expect to engage with the broader CW community?

Well, it's one thing in our case, and it will be different in your case.

Is your team open to having new participants join?

Yes.

So this is just about the personnel of the team.

This second part is just these two questions are just about the live stream.

Does your team want to present live or with a recorded video or no?

Just write, yes, we'd like to present live.

And if you want to do a video, do you want any help recording that video just to facilitate that process?

So two questions about the live stream.

We then are going to explore a bunch of questions that are

related to really the team's focus.

And these are derived and sort of developed from the facilitator's catechism and other work.

But a few questions that we ask are, what are your teams?

And these can be single sentence, single word.

You don't need to write the essays here, but like these are things to bring up and ask as well as in the team's practices and in team's processes.

there's sections about kinds of conversations to have as forming a team.

So these are all like ongoing conversations to have, and there isn't always like an end point or a clean answer, but these are conversations to have about like, what are we doing and how are we going to be doing it?

So these questions in this last part of the form are, what are the team's objectives and motivations?

What is the problem space that the problem that the team is addressing is in?

Who are the actors such as stakeholders and organizations?

What are some limitations of traditional methods and why are those methods inadequate for the kinds of problems that the team is pursuing?

How will the team begin to tackle this problem space?

How will the team track progress and implement their approach?

And what would success look like?

How will the measurement of outcomes be happening for this team?

And then just any feedback.

So these are questions that could be one word or sentence for a team, or this could be 50 to 80% of a grant application that is in a format that copying these answers out with the question headers or not is gonna make communicating that project

possible so like it's a conversation to be having and it's about trading off how much effort to spend on different parts of the form etc so we're realists but also this is like a format where if these questions can be answered or if you can give a several minute

recorded video or several paragraph description that addresses these questions it will clarify the team in a way that not having them so clearly laid out won't be able to so that's the whole team sprouting form once that happens then the team will be seen in this row down here uh

But no team sprouts have formed yet, which is totally awesome because we're up to six seeds.

And new seeds will continue to pour in, and then some of them will start to sprout.

So on that sprouting form, what are any thoughts that you have, Blue or Mikayla?


SPEAKER_03:
I think I already gave my thoughts, so Mikayla?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I think it's really nice to have these questions laid out, kind of pre-thought of, even if they don't apply exactly, but it really clarifies what your intentions are and how you want to go about with your team.

And yeah, I'm a big fan of questions and answers to clarify your thoughts.

I think it's great.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

So, and also this is our first time with this as the team's process.

So it'd be really helpful to have people's feedback, like what is interesting or helpful or not.

And we hope to continue to build out this process and build in reasonable automations so that we could send emails to people who filled out a form or be able to connect even better.

But this is like just iterating on it.

So that covers much of what we wanted to explore with the teams from the slides and in the PSSOT.

Anything else to add?

Otherwise, we'll head over to the Jamboard and I'll post that link again in the chat.

But any other thoughts, Blue or Michaela?


SPEAKER_02:
I think people should just come in there.

Try something new.

and try to make a team.

Hey, I'm on my first team now.

Great.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

Okay, so I've posted the Jamboard link into the YouTube live chat.

Also, if you want to find it at any other time, you could go to weekend program.

Here we are in the middle live stream.

And the ways that you can find that what we're looking at is prepare the Jamboard that we will be using.

And that Jamboard link will open.

And I'm just gonna, and yeah.

So that's how you can reach the Jamboard at any time.

And just like the live stream is recorded, which allows us to engage with asynchronous participants and those who are rewatching, the Jamboard also is available continuously and after the weekend.

In the opening live stream, we talked about a few different things.

And so just as a Jamboard refresher, clicking on this slides on the top,

how you can select which slide to walk over to and then on the left bar is how you can make a sticky note appear or whether you can do a pen for drawing use a laser we talked about online collaboration we talked about intention in complex systems and some of our intentions i don't know what happened here

but it was related to who are you and how did you discover complexity?

Or at least that's how it started, how it started, how it's going.

We talked about complexity having impact in real world systems.

And then about since that impact occurs on teams, which is something we are speaking about today as well, we talked about how do we collaborate on complex projects?

And then we kind of brought that to Complexity Weekend by discussing some appreciations, desires, tensions, and frictions about everything related to Complexity Weekend and ways of re-imagining even that intersection or that interface there as people were making structural modifications as well as adding information.

So there's always a lot happening, but we had an awesome time in the last live stream.

And we're going to now go to slide 10 and look at what somebody has added as a slide, which I didn't know existed before, but that's always the fun.

And let's just start here.

And we'll talk for a little bit on each of a few slides.

And then we'll hang out as much as we want.

any comments that people are having in the Jamboard or in the YouTube live chat.

And then we'll take a few minute break before picking up that alternating rhythm after ending this livestream.

So this says, how can we reduce greenhouse gas emissions across fields?

Scientific fields?

Wheat fields?

What kind of fields?

what is your field is it contributing to the problem so what do either of you see here i see an anonymous or pseudonymous approach that someone has opened as a an artifact that's meant to be built upon because it's in a space and in a document where we can continue to be like well greenhouse gas emissions but what about other environmental impacts

So it's a space where we don't just need to critique from the sideline that something is or isn't complete or perfectly stated.

It's like we get to be a part of this discussion, whether we showed up in the first inning or the ninth inning.

And there's a format that's helping us connect important problems in the world

to the specifics of maybe how we actually see our own work.

Regeneration.

My field is all about regeneration, people, communities, nature.

Connect people with partial solutions.

Issue of influencers, experts with theory and experts with practice.

If using most effective methods of influence

may undermine public's capacity to build expertise.

What do either of you think any of this means?

When I see undermining...

it sounds like mining under the surface so it's sort of like if we're building um an ecosystem and there's the air and then there's the the terrestrial habitat and the water table and then there's the underground and there's the deep underground and

What if there's clean skies but the underground has been undermined?

Or what if there's pristine water tables but some other aspect of the ecosystem is being challenged?

Being human has serious environmental impacts.

Relative to what?

How can you, we, I make a better environment for others?


SPEAKER_02:
I'm coming back to the big pink one in the middle you were talking about before with the undermining.

I think this kind of resonates with the session we had yesterday about values for Complexity Weekend, saying by being a bridge between different theory and practice and experts and practitioners and different disciplines, we can kind of

foresee problematic solutions that have negative externalities that have not yet been seen because once you're in your silo, you don't see these unintended consequences.

So we're talking, you know, bridging points of view, bridging disciplines, bridging approaches, and maybe combining them into a very new way of approaching things.

I don't know.

Just a thought.


SPEAKER_03:
So, yeah, that's an important thing, I think, Michaela, and part of what working in a complex systems type of way can help with, because it tends to un-silo us and maybe let us see one step ahead, perhaps.

But the trouble is, is no matter how many

um, scientific disciplines we have coming together to work on a difficult problem, we can't ever see all of the steps ahead.

Uh, um, so really like the, the, um, making a, making a better environment, like, like let's impact the environment with some intentionality.

Um, and you know, like create a garden, create a pollinator space, create,

something because there's so much so much of what humans are doing is destructive I mean even just eating like these things that somebody put on their food consumption so choice of what we eat where does what we eat come from what's the carbon footprint of this organic orange that I'm getting in the middle of December where did it come from because probably not my backyard right yeah


SPEAKER_04:
We have a channel CW sustain metrics.

And if you check in the C existing teams, it's also here and there's gonna be hopefully one or multiple teams arising out of this CW sustain metrics where we're gonna be like,

really diving into this in the specifics of cw but also learning tools and approaches that help with this kind of holistic ecological impact analysis across different areas so it made me think about in adaptive environments and like seasons so it's not like the environment of a desert

let alone a rainforest or a mountain habitat, it doesn't maintain this sort of like fluorescent light,

steady state, the triple threat position in basketball is what they call it, which is when you're holding the ball in front of you, you could either dribble or you could pass or you could shoot.

But of course, in basketball, at any given moment, it's not like the person is always in that triple threat position.

So the environment is adaptive, not because it's spending a lot of its time poised in a pluripotent state,

but because it's undergoing these very structured transitions with the seasons and one only needs to be able to get to the next season.

So it's not as simple as just greedily getting to the next season, but also at the same time, it's not like there always has to be this readiness to go every single possible way.

Targeting systemic change.

take care but don't feel too guilty about personal emissions founders pledge.com okay thanks for sharing the link and the information something that people can check out and it always goes right to uh the complexity of it with like our own role

from an ecological and from a narrative perspective about being engaged in these kinds of works.

Like how many atoms of lithium die to move a post-it note?

Those are interesting questions.

And Kai and others have really like raised questions

awareness about how we barely even have the grammar to ask some of these important questions and yeah potentially certain ecological impacts are ameliorated through online although there's a wide uncertainty about what the impacts of online are in in many ways so it it's a complex question blue


SPEAKER_03:
So how many atoms of lithium die, uh, to move a post-it note?

Like how many insects did you trample on your walk to work this morning?

So, I mean, a lot of these questions we don't stop to consider.

We just walk to work or we just move the post-it note.

Um, and that's the, the, the butterfly effect, right.

Or like, you know, you just never know what happens now, how it's going to, um, have an impact later down the road.

Um,

to what population, et cetera.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

So any other thoughts on this one?

Or we will continue on.

This was just sort of like a, it was a gift left by some other participant.

Okay.

Let's keep teams in mind.

But let's think about just the ways that community can support each other, not just in a role-based team way.

After this, so we're on slide 11 now.

After this, we will look at some team members a little bit more specifically and bring in some information about teams.

But what kinds of things are people looking to support others with?

in complexity weekends and what kinds of things are people looking for.

So we're on slide 11 community support and people can put their team or individual contact information, or it can just be left open.

Like, huh?

Someone's looking for competitive game data sets.

That is interesting.

Graphic designers.

Someone can give guidance for brainstormings.

So, and while people are going to this Jamboard and continuing to add questions, how do we go from curiosity about a complexity idea

and or concern about some type of situation happening locally or globally, how do we connect these two?

How do we connect this curiosity that we might have some amount of and some concern or desire to focus on a certain area that we might have?

How do we go from there to asks to the community?

Also, Blue, what are you interested in with games?


SPEAKER_03:
Sorry, I have to get off the Jamboard.

Come over here.

I'm on my little monitor, my little portable monitor.

So this is something that came up last night with Kevin and Sarah and Jen.

you know, we were talking about data science and the difficulty of getting a good data set.

And this is something, like, that I was interested in even at the last CW.

The, like, we had, like, the, I don't know if you came to any of my sessions, but it was, like, essentially, like, a competitive foraging game.

But I'm interested in, like, the interactions in kind of, like, an XY pixel space.

between people and how that leads to the achievement of goals.

So I just am interested in the physicality or proximal physicality.

You can't really track people, where they go, where they meet, where they interact.

I mean, that's difficult to do in a real space.

But it's interesting to see online.

Like you can kind of track the quote physical location of a player slash person.

And yeah.

So there's a game that my kids turned me on to.

It's agger.io.

I don't know if you've ever played it.

It's really simple and cute.

Like you're a little dot and you can eat dots that are smaller than you and it makes you bigger.

And then you can

anything bigger than you can eat you kind of like, that's like the idea.

And it's just super simple, but, but people have like, you know, there's all kinds of stuff that comes into play.

Like there's teams that form, like you can explicitly form a team.

Oh yeah, there you go.

Explicitly form a team, or you can make, you can like spontaneously form a team.

Also, like you partner with people and like that tends to sense people or some people don't ever partner.

So like there's a cooperation competition, like some unspoken like rules that I've observed just in people's behavior.

That's I find it so interesting.

And like what leads to success and failure?

And like there's a lot of deception like, oh, yeah, come play with me.

I'll be on your team.

Just kidding.

I'm going to eat you.

Like there's a lot of that that goes on.

And so it's that kind of behavior.

And I just, I, I'm really curious to see if it, if we can like cluster those behaviors in a way, and maybe they map onto some kind of personality type, like maybe, maybe there's a big five association or, or something like that.

Anyway, that, that's the, that was the, something that came up last night, but it's, it's something that I've been interested in for a long time.

Like what, what, what is the physicality that underlies competition and cooperation?

So I'd like to see a data set like that.


SPEAKER_04:
Without falling into any negative attractors of like what gamification could be or what games are, how can teams be fun and engaging like a game?

Or how can it contain certain elements of games?

recognizing that people love all different kinds of games?


SPEAKER_02:
I think one part is putting together different skill sets and distributing the tasks according to skill set or combined skill sets.

And I think that's very close to games or to hunting.

If we talk about hunter-gatherers, some are good at eyesight and some are good at ambushing.

Some have patience.

I don't.

So I need somebody who's very patient to stalk that mammoth.

But I can plan it out.

I can plan it out.

And we need so and so many arrows.

And then we need arrow makers.

And I think this combination of different skill sets and towards a common goal, I think that gamifies the teams.


SPEAKER_04:
Very interesting.

And there's games like where... There aren't different rules.

Like everyone... Well, there's different players, but like checkers.

There's similar... The pieces are similar and the players have similar opportunities.

And then there's other types of games where there's a lot of a rich background in each team member.

So I'm just adding this.

So...

looking for support in pushing the meeting nicer stuff so maybe that's a project someone's looking for moving forward cool and and and again this jam board exists like as a way for people to modify it asynchronously anytime and return to it and so it's just like

think of it as where you can provide assistance and as well as provide it, um, request and provide, sorry.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
So just going back to, um, the gamification of teams, like I think, um, I don't know that, that there's necessarily like a competition.

Um, but I think that, that there's the cooperative aspect, um,

in like a goal directed way.

And that, that's kind of more, um, more interesting than, than, uh, competition.

Like how does cooperation help you achieve your goal?

Um, and I, I think that that's, uh, that that's, that is like essentially, you know, we are social creatures.

That's, that's what we do.

We cooperate.

Um, we have extensive, extensive networking and information transmission skills.

So, so how, um,

how do we cooperate directly and also indirectly?

Like, like by, you know, putting this information out about complexity weekend and, you know, having this like recorded on YouTube and available, um, it leaves like a stigmatic trail for people to follow and, and it'll lead them back into complexity weekend.

Like we're not directly cooperating, but, but perhaps like indirectly we're cooperating with some people, um,

to help them achieve their goals just by being here on YouTube.


SPEAKER_04:
A tool to hack meeting culture that can change the world and I need help in pushing slash pulling.

Excellent.

Let's hear about it and learn about it.

And an awesome way to do that might be through submitting a team seed form.

Even if you've worked on this for years or you came up with it like five minutes ago, just say, this is a Team Seed form.

I'm looking for people with these kinds of skills or any kind of curiosity who might be interested in this type of thing, because that's how we make it visible.

So thanks a ton for posting it here.

And yeah, cool.

So there's a website.

So perhaps there's already a little development on it.

That's awesome.

many projects in different stages can can um be looking for community support how can teams find alignment

Cool.

Should we head to the teams looking for team members, or what would you like to look at?


SPEAKER_03:
So just whoever's looking for ways that teams can find alignment, I'm the one who said I have advice in design and maintenance of teams and projects.

So if you need help, come find me in the office hours.

I will help your team find alignment or try.


SPEAKER_04:
very cool very cool yes let's just look a little bit then about this uh team members looking for team members page and then i'm going to copy in the current state of the c existing teams sync it just to see who's there okay

So most who will be participating and watching this livestream probably will be in replay, which is always the case with livestreams because it's just how they are.

So this is like an asynchronous artifact.

We're just copying out the current state of the team seeds.

I guess it's something that I'm still and always curious about.

Like, how do we even...


SPEAKER_03:
recognize wanting to be on a team what is that like zero to one moment with wanting to participate in complexity well i think i just had that moment so like i'm looking for competitive game data sets but like i i'm i'm over overwhelmed and overburdened and overloaded with uh

with other projects.

Like I said, I have an infinity list of things.

And so this is kind of something that's been tickling the back of my mind for a while.

Maybe if you're not infinity overloaded with projects and ideas, you can take that, that little idea, something that's been tickling the back of your mind for a little while and say, I should fill out a team seat form and see if anybody's interested in doing this.

I'm not going to do that because yeah, come talk to me, send me a key base message or something.

If you're interested in competitive game data sets.

Or know how to obtain one.

Or make one.

But until I have that person.

Someone else.

It's going to take someone else.

That's also interested in.

Or knows how to find the data.

Because that's the hardest problem sometimes.

It's going to take that for me to start a team seed for.

But like that's the.

Maybe I need a team.

I just had that like tickling in the back of my mind.

With that idea.

Like maybe I should put that on this.

Our team is missing this skill set.

So yeah.

If someone else is having a similar moment, fill out the form.


SPEAKER_04:
Mikaela, anything?

Otherwise, I would have thought.

Okay, so it makes me think about how our difference work and play...

and our different backgrounds can really help each other imagine different kinds of teams.

So like, for example, in research, there are some archetypes, like some patterns or motifs of teams that

I recognize and feel comfortable working in.

Like this is this person's research curiosity, and then their collaborator is going to be helping them on this one technical part.

Or it's an interdisciplinary question between area A and B.

And this collaboration is a co-equal collaboration where they're each learning about the other one's area, but it's like a co-lab between area A and B and that's the research question.

So just a few examples of like somebody with a main driver and a technical collaborator or two different disciplines that are coming together and there's like a conversation to be had there, but there's many other types of even just research and academic collaborations.

And those are the kinds of teams that I've spent time on.

And then I'll connect to somebody who's familiar with a totally different area and different ways of working.

And there are like patterns and configurations

that even if I saw all of the pieces wouldn't present themselves to me.

So it's like being in the kitchen and there's like flour and water and spices and things.

And one person sees how to make this kind of bread and one person sees how to make this kind of dish.

So it's like, there's so much to learn from each other's working perspectives in ways that are just

sometimes hard to convey, but just the way that people will see the same pieces on the table and just unpack it in a different way that can be bringing a level of functionality or a level of innovation or a level of financial realism or a level of social consideration or of ecological awareness that no one...

may have familiar with across the board.

And so then what holds teams like that together?

What's the bridge that connects those different concerns and experiences?

And that's a lot of where complexity comes into play.

It's an attractor to return to some of these complexity terms and questions because wherever we are in our different disciplinary backgrounds or experiences,

we could come back to that question of like, what is the team's mission or objective?

And we could even add the question here, like, how does it relate to complexity?

How will complexity be related to your team?

So just an interesting thought, because like, I always learn about cool links,

people share like cool nuggets of information interesting new words and new connections but then also there's like something that's more um world view like even if not all encompassing just in the in the ways of working

that when we're on the team get unpacked.

And that's not something that can be recorded.

It's not something that can be simply watched in a video.

It's actually when we're working through it is when some of those very special moments occur.


SPEAKER_02:
That's also very, very true from different cultures.

It's very interesting to have people from different cultures on the team, just because sometimes you're like, OK, never thought of that.

And that's very important in that culture or in that society or that community.

So yeah, I encourage diversity in your teams.


SPEAKER_03:
It's really interesting.

even when you're coming from the same culture, like how you can look at the same data or the same particular problem in the research space and see it very differently.

And sometimes that presents itself as a problem to be resolved as part of the work.

And the cultural aspect is also really interesting.

Like in some cultures, you know, I mean, we're very individualistic in the West and, you know, we see,

children, when we teach them, you know, this is how to construct a tower out of blocks.

Then they start to construct a tower but end up building a city or something like that.

And we see that as, oh, that's so, like, great and innovative.

And in some other cultures, it's seen as, like, that child is an idiot because they can't follow directions.

So it's just very, like, different, different, different way to approach things.


SPEAKER_04:
One.

Oh, yeah, Michaela, please.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I was just wondering what's going on.

You must be very hungry because you've got a cooking show and ingredients in the kitchen.

So you should go for breakfast very soon.

It's true.

Just listening to your words.


SPEAKER_04:
It's true.

I think there have been a lot of, well, I've just been learning some kitchen vocabulary.

So maybe I've been thinking about that a little bit more.

But that's true.

One thought, and I'll try to steer it away from anything culinary, Michaela.

No, it's this idea of co-culturing for microbes.

So some microbes can be grown in a monoculture or a pure culture.

You could take one bacterium in a sterile flask, and then it will populate the flask with that bacterium.

But

there's so much biodiversity like in soils and in water and in our gut and so on.

And like, if you just plate those onto a plate or like put them into a growing solution, like not all of them will grow alone.

And so there's these co-cultures and sometimes there's like stable partner co-cultures.

And there's like these two bacteria together, they can make like a stable, pure culture.

But the complexity of the microbiome and of a lot of these ecological interactions is like they do exist in a very multi-culture way.

And what does that enable us or challenge us in being able to say what the role of any single piece is like in a biofilm?

Like if you can't grow the piece in isolation, and even if you could, it wouldn't say what it was doing in the biofilm, but even if you could grow it in isolation,

you'd have a partial picture and then you could remove it or you could add more of it to the biofilm.

But is that what that piece does in the biofilm?

Or is that how the system responds to a change?

And so just like, then that made me think about how we have also this sort of fractal diversity of our enculturation as people.

And like, even if there was 10 clones with the same life experience,

they might not necessarily have a functional team having just consistent and in some ways they might make limited decisions if they all did make a certain like have a certain um over emphasis on some area for example so just this co-culturing

and about what kinds of environments support co-cultured growth and resilience growth versus those that sort of screen for aggressive and sort of dominating type growth, which is like a short-term increase, but it can't be part of a stable ecosystem.

We tend to not see like those kinds of systems have broad resilience.

We're on slide 12, by the way.

I think what happened is I posted slide 10 in the Keybase, in the Explore, in the Sustained Metrics channel.

And I think many people are asynchronously in Keybase and engaging.

So then that's why people are continuing to add stuff here.

so it's fun and I mean again it's it's the opportunity and the challenges with like fragmented attention across different slides and different platforms different though also there could be more than enough connections so that people could provide what they were looking to provide and find what they're looking to find

so for those who are seeking if you're you know deep into this live stream and still seeking

just you're totally on the right wavelength and i hope that you can either be finding what you're already looking for in complexity weekend or just take that one extra keyboard press and like message any of us like blue or michaela or i or any other facilitator or post in a keybase team

Because, like, you're on the hill where you can now see some of the directions.

And it's, like, more downhill than not from here.

Weirdly.


SPEAKER_03:
Or check the updated coda, too, because we have posted some team seeds here.

But by the time you're watching this livestream, hopefully there's more.


SPEAKER_04:
It's, like, refreshing so-called social media.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, we have it.

We have it.


SPEAKER_04:
okay awesome so uh doves has has um added um the meeting spicer support group how to improve and market better the meeting spicer so it significantly changes the world for better once we change the world have fun after dinner first the work um

This is super fun, like just, yeah, to see, again, like to be part of this feedbacks and information patterns in the system where like two participants in different areas who wouldn't have connected can connect on Cubase from something and they can connect and gather just by co-occurring.

All somebody has to do is go to the team form

share their screen or fill it out after the conversation ends.

And then it's like, you've made a mark, actually.

You've really contributed and you've opened up a thread.

It's not a commitment to spend any specific amount of time.

So before leaving the motivation for the project idea, like, wouldn't it be amazing to apply complexity for meetings?

but we're instantly jumping to like, what do we have to do next week in our day jobs?

And like, what are the limitations and the constraints that other teams have faced?

Like we can just stick with that intention for one more minute and follow through on it with a form.

And now there's a cohort of people who are going to look at this.

And not everybody will, and not everybody who looks at it may care about any one specific project, but it's like the door is there.

So you're providing a door for other participants.

You're being a facilitator of a project really when you enter your project into a Team Seed form.

So it's like, it's just cool to...

see this because in some way and it'll be amazing when we have other visualizations and it can be translated to different languages and all these different things but like pretty cool that for the first time we're able to have that type of real real-time team visibility and to have already seven teams starting up so fun times um

so blue and michaela any like thoughts or other questions otherwise let's just go back to the pssot and then end it in a few minutes okay awesome so going back to the participant single source of truth i'm going to go to the top page to start here the welcome letter on the very very first link that's provided here that takes us to weekend program so here we are in the weekend program the middle live stream

about to end so i'm going to unlock the page strike through this text we are going to be meeting at 14 utc so that's in 20 minutes but go to gather just to hang out and talk before but in 20 minutes in the top left live session room a

going to be having one-on-one sessions and that's just going to be an opportunity to have like unstructured conversations with other participants so that's like the epitome of you had to be there is the people who show up engage in these like amazing connections and

special for those who are there so blue and michaela if you have any last thoughts feel free to add it otherwise thanks a ton for the live stream insights and yeah i hope that we get to hang out more over the rest of this weekend


SPEAKER_03:
Just one final thought.

We are going to physically come around to everyone up to come to the one-on-one session because this is one of the best chances that you have to meet other people in your cohort that you maybe haven't met yet.

So I just want everyone to encourage everyone to just come of your own volition.

Otherwise, we will drag you kicking and screaming into the one-on-one.

so that you have a chance to meet the other people that are here and doing this with you, because we are the teamwork that makes the dream work, right?

So you have to come play on your team.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool, cool.

And I just want to tell, yes, that's perfect.

Cool.

So see you in about 20 minutes or less.

Makayla, any last thoughts?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I think it's fantastic that we create a team.

It kind of wasn't in an idea of thought yesterday.

Today we have a team seed and to anyone on that team, see you in an hour and a half for the session number two.


SPEAKER_04:
Oh, very true.

All right.

Thanks a lot, everybody.

See you later.

Bye.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks, Daniel.


SPEAKER_00:
Bye.

See you.