SPEAKER_00:
Okay, I think we're live.

Hello everyone.

Welcome to the Synergetics live stream.

This is Synergetics live stream number 7.0.

My name is Daniel Friedman and really happy just to be back at a Synergetics live stream.

Today in Synergetics live stream seven,

The spirit is encapsulated in the three terms collective, flow, and appreciation.

I'm just really appreciative that I was able to see some old friends and those who I hadn't seen in a while yesterday and just happy that it's a special Sunday.

And I can do this.

Today in 7.0, there are going to be, as usual, a sort of introduction section and then several sections from Synergetics.

So the usual introduction sections are the key memes and themes, the things to integrate, then just recapitulate the structure of how we're going to read the text and then jump right into the text.

And it's not going to be in the order of the book because many trajectories aren't, many information foraging paths are not.

hope that this order will connect the concepts in an interesting way whether this is your first time hearing about these sections or not the key memes and oh the three sections are going to be 535 halo principle 224 angular topology 1005 biospherical patterns

The key memes and themes of Synergetics are that it's related to relational and multi-scale thinking.

So kind of like complexity.

It's connected to accessible experiences.

Often that's called operational thinking.

And I've been learning this past month about operationalism.

which clearly influenced Bucky because he talked about operational mathematics and other operational things.

And it just means that we're gonna focus on the process and the embodiment and the who and the what and the why and the where of the doing rather than the abstraction.

And that relates it to everyone's accessible experience in a way that perhaps other areas of math might seem to move away from everyone's accessible experience.

in synergetics there aren't infinitesimals nor infinity large sections or points and lines and planes physically but metaphysically of course they exist there's a word right there and we can define them formally so they do exist formally but they don't exist physically so what is the difference well

Today the sections are going to be really about the difference between what is the difference between infinitesimally close to being a straight line but a curved line and being a straight line.

That's one of the ideas that we'll come back to a few times today.

And in Synergetics, design is an anticipatory or a cybernetic, it's a planning science.

Like you plan to build a ramp leading up to your building because there might be many reasons why you would want that, or you might want to have a secondary strategy.

So that's designing strategies and the hardware and software, the behavior, total comprehensive design for anticipating future situations.

tensegrity is sort of the cousin or nested practice within synergetics kind of in a way that engineering is related to physics so tensegrity is related to tension and compression which are two contrasting elements or principles in architecture physically and synergetics

is the geometry of thinking, because it's about making similar structures and ones that you probably can't build with current materials or maybe with any physical materials, but ones you can think of.

Space has a shape.

You can only pack the oranges specific ways.

So what are those shapes to physical space?

And then how do we see that as the tip of the iceberg of something that's bigger in our thinking?

Another idea is that structure is pattern.

So structure can be like a static structure, like a house is what might come to mind.

That might be structural integrity, at least in the short term.

But then the pattern integrity could be something like a cloud where the air is passing through it and the cloud is representing a constant turbulent state, but it's a roiling edge that's staying stationary.

So a non-equilibrium steady state, that's a dynamic pattern integrity or replicator's DNA.

Universe is the total scenario, and you don't need to add the universe because it just is.

And system means any subsystem.

And it turns out that systems, because they're how we're thinking about them or how they influence each other, they have shape.

And that's why we're using geometry and topology to think about systems thinking.

And then there's this 4D, we can even add 4D time lock.

because that's a book I've not actually read as much of it as all of it, but 4D can refer to a different perception on time, perhaps different than the three plus one that's more common in physics.

4D can refer to thinking about the four directions and the divergent rays coming out of a central point that's tetrahedral rather than square or XYZ Cartesian type coordinates.

And then also there's other definitions of what 4D can be and Kirby Erner goes into those in some of his videos.

Oh, I was on the wrong slide there, but it's all good.

Things to integrate, haven't really updated this too much since last time we all checked in, but there's definitely...

areas for anyone to suggest resources or any links to modern computational approaches.

These are things I'm really curious about, but I would need someone to kind of help me through it or perhaps to come on a live stream to talk about some package in software or some computational geometry.

Alright, well, if anyone else wants to make a suggestion about Synergetics Livestream or co-conversate or something like that, just let me know.

You can probably leave a comment somewhere and I might find it or just get in touch with me directly.

So let's go into the sections of the text because I think there'll be a little bit to read.

First, Halo Principle, then Angular Topology, then Biospherical Patterns.

So let's go to 535.

We will, as usual, read the text without interruption for the section, because it's often meant to be exactly parsed in that phonemic way, which is related to this idea that the translatability of Bucky's work, which Applewhite raises in Cosmic Fishing,

and then after reading it once we'll uh reread with an interspersion maybe not all of it for some of these longer sections and then think of an example think of a question or see where it takes us then so 535 the halo concept the phenomenon infinity of the calculus is inherently finite see section 224.11

Universe is non-simultaneous but finite, because all experiences begin and end, and being terminal, are finite.

Ergo, universe, as the sum of finites, is finite.

So the first part is a claim about what most people think of as calculus, which is when you take an integral or a differentiation of something, and it's kind of like delta x is the differential, rise over run.

Like if you go as you get to a smaller and smaller and smaller interval,

then it usually if it's a nice and well-behaved smooth function then that converges on okay you're getting closer and closer to going up two clicks every time you go over one click and then that would be a rise over run of two in that case and so bucky's saying just stop at that

finer and finer grain, and you don't need to appeal to some asymptote or infinity.

You can just be looking closer and closer at this finite because he thinks that that's wrapped up with some delusions about the tiniest thing and the biggest thing.

So he first says, well, that's, and you could kind of think about the same on the integral, which often calculates like a histogram under the curve and makes it for smaller and smaller bins.

would love to talk to a math person who knows more about all, there's a lot of ways to do integrals and differentiators as my friend Zach has taught me, but that's just kind of broadly what he's saying.

And then on the bigger scale, he's saying, forget numbers that are infinitely large, because it's one thing if you can think of something that's,

large just like you can think of a triangle which doesn't exist in real life either you can think of something that's infinite but universe which is our actual operating situation is non-simultaneous but finite and maybe someone could disagree but that's what he's saying and then uh universe of the sum of finites is finite

So this is going to set up a very strong distinction from many other ways of thinking, which is that systems are always finite.

In fact, they're D-finite.

We're going to define them.

And then universe is all the systems.

And you just can call it universe.

And there's nothing else outside of universe or universe.

Maybe there's some other layer for Bucky.

But yep, just to kind of go into that one for more than probably the other ones, because this idea that we're going to be really finite in how we think about specific systems, but then that opening us up to very broad vistas of imagination is a common concept in synergetics.

Non-simultaneous universe is finite, but conceptually undefinable.

Local systems are definable.

We discover that universe is finite and a local system is definite.

Every definite local system has inherent, always and only co-occurring two-ness of polar axis spinability and two-ness of concave convex complementary disparity of energy interaction behavior plus two invisible tetrahedra or two unities adding together as equally finitely fourfold symmetry universe.

difference between universe and any local system is always to invisible tetrahedra every local system may be subdivided into whole tetrahedra and then there's a footnote that wrote concave concentrates radiation convex diffuses radiation all right this one is definitely uh

chopped and sliced together, as they say, but it contains a lot of information.

Non-simultaneous universe means that there's local rules or local logic applying, but just like when there's an event that we call lightning and then the light travels out faster than the sound or two people perceive it at different times, that kind of triangulation or tetrahedralation is always happening.

And so we think about universe, at least in how we model it instrumentally, if not in how it quote really is, it's things that are happening locally in time for them, whatever it is.

And therefore locally, things are going to be finite, but they're not going to be nice conceptually.

So you get either local systems, which are kind of definable, measurable, observable, specific, but they're not conceptually nice.

That's why someone says, oh, well, that kind of government, that's not,

fill in the blank because no real system is a triangle so you can say well that one yeah that one was more like an oval and oh this one was actually a square but nothing is going to be actually a triangle we discovered that universe uh this is sort of a re-statement but it brings us from that sort of fairly mainstream claim that there's local definability but not conceptual clarity and vice versa for the generalizations

In comes this co-occurring 2-ness of polar axis spinability.

So this is a spinable component, a concave convex in-out, in-and-out component, and then a duality of energy interaction behavior, which gets footnoted.

And two tets.

That's two unities because tetrahedra is one.

then that gets added together as an equally finite fourfold symmetry universe which reminds me of fourfold albion by william blake

is a restatement of the uh sec of the section about the two invisible tetrahedra that the difference between universe and local system is always two invisible tetrahedra so that's like saying to make that markov blanket that friston blanket to separate the local system to really bound it so that there is an in and out you need to apply two indivisible tets

And it's kind of like if you just have a, yeah, you can probably imagine it like to close that last little bit on the shape to make it from just an open surface where there's things diffusing in and out through a big open pore, but to actually close the Markov blanket in a way that makes it modelable and actually must kind of be something like that.

If it's not diffusing in and out, there's something like a membrane.

So whether you go into whether is the membrane the Markov blanket, it's kind of second level.

The point is, if there's inside and outside modelability, something happened to close the system in a causal loop sense.

And because it's a thought that, oh, well, there's causal closure.

Everybody will say, oh, of course, there's causal closure with the Kantian organism concept or something like that.

But Synergetics is going to frame that as two tets.

Finite minus D-finite means four tetrahedra minus two tetrahedra.

Finite universe equals eight cyclic unities.

Every tetrahedra equals two, having inside outingness, oscillatory transformability, unavailable to any structural system other than the tetrahedra.

So finite, four tets, a tet of tet, tet-tet.

and then you lose this like spinnable two maybe let's come back to that this like spin ability because this is one of the more esoteric uh introductions when there's closure in synergetics the convex concave is is uh by definition the complementary disparity of interaction

is again it's sort of a physical analogy because a concave shape like if you have a radar dish if it's shaped so that you're collecting more you're concentrating the signal and if you were spreading it out it would radiate out so that's kind of like fair and then um the two invisible tetrahedra is kind of just a synergetics statement about what comes in and we're going to actually that's what one of these future sections are going to be about so um

this last part of three is that the tet is going to have some transform abilities that no other system other than the tet has and also i'll just share my tet today which is um again i think i've said this probably but trevor made this for me in college so just a solid brass tet four

Halo conceptioning discloses the minute yet finitely discrete inaccuracy of the fundamental assumption upon which calculus was built, to wit, that for an infinitesimal moment, a line is congruent with a circle to which it is tangent, and that a plane is congruent with a sphere to which it is tangent.

Calculus had assumed 360 degrees around every point on a sphere.

The sum of the sphere's angle was said to be infinite.

The halo concept and its angularly generated topology proves there are always 720 degrees, or two times unity of 360 degrees, less than the calculus's assumption of 360 degrees times every point in every, quote, spherical system, end quote.

This 720 degrees equals the sum of the angles of a tetrahedron.

can state that the number of vertexes of any system including a sphere which must geodesically in universal energy conservation be a polyhedron of n vertexes minus 2 times 360 degrees equals the sum of the angles around all the vertexes of the system 2 times 360 degrees which was the amount subtracted equals 720 degrees which is the angular description of the tetrahedron we have to take angular

tux in the non-conceptual finite e the calculus infinity the tux add up to 720 degrees i.e one tetrahedron the difference between conceptual d finite e and non-conceptual finite e is one non-conceptual finite tetrahedron

Wow, that's a great section because it brings a lot together.

This is kind of like Peter Thiel, zero to one.

How do you take something from being not conceptual and you make it a concept?

Well, you add in one definite concept.

You go zero to one with the tet.

You introduce the non-conceptual specific tet.

And then that made the idea reality.

So that is this last little part.

That's the generalization.

But it turns out that that

qualitative claim is related to not just a quantitative claim about shapes but he's just calling out all of i guess what people would call the infinitesimal calculus so what is calculus's error and what is he calling it so this is the halo concept the halo concept

He may or may not ever even say why it's called that, but you can maybe guess or imagine.

He's starting with this observation that are...

can be described in two or one dimension, or two or three, depending on how you think about it.

So a circle and the tangent on a circle.

So if you have a curve like y equals x squared, the idea was even if it's smooth, then just like it was on a unit circle or something, you could take a line that touches the circle at only one point, which is like saying, well, then the circle, it kind of kisses the line,

But then the points on either side of that point are below.

How much below?

Well, they're infinitely below, infinitely small below.

And so that way of thinking of contact with just like, okay, I have a smoothly differentiable function and I'm going to take a line and that's going to be the differentiable or the derivative.

And that's the rate of change.

And that's analogous to the claim that you can have a sphere, like here's a sphere right here.

You have a sphere and then you could lie some sort of plane on it, but clearly they diverge.

So that error can be done in different forms, but you kind of need that to do some of the tricks that calculus does.

and then the implications of that is that the angle of the sphere is infinite oh it's an it's like an infinite it's better than an infinitely sided polyhedra but for bucky he's basically saying no you're never going to get away from the fact that you're going to have an n-sided

shape finitely and so it's going to be it still has to play by the rules of polyhedra you don't get to generalize away this really key element of polyhedra just because you would rather have a smooth sphere it's fine to think about a smooth sphere which bucky calls like omni radiation or omni dot dot dot

but you still can't cheat the general rules of being a polyhedra.

So this tuck is kind of like, it's like, oh, well, the money went nowhere.

We took a ton of money.

We took $720, 720 Bitcoin, and then we just distributed it into infinitely many wallets.

Oh, which wallets?

There are none.

What?

I thought you said there was, can you give me one?

I can't give you any.

So that's kind of this ridiculous joke that Bucky thinks is an error at the heart of some of these assumptions.

He's not saying it's not useful for some scale.

He is familiar with engineering and I'm sure he used integrals and derivatives.

He's saying that we're overgeneralizing from the limited utility range of our tooling to make way bigger claims about how space is.

And he's basically saying, you got to take it back to thinking about inside and outside.

And then you're going to step away from the idea that there's going to be a smooth curve where you can lie straight line because that's kind of all mixed up. 535.

is going to get take it to kind of a different interesting level so number five in the general theory of variables it has been recognized that the set of all the variables made to be divided into two classes one the class of all the inclusive variables within a given system the interior relevance and two the class of all those operative exclusive of the system the exterior relevance

has been further recognized that the variables outside the system may affect the system from outside in varying degrees specific levels of subclasses of these background or outside variables are identified as parameters but the background concept is fallaciously inadequate dealing with insideness and outsideness for background is limited to the two dimension or flat projection concept

which inherently lacks insideness, ergo cannot also have outsideness, which also and only coexists with insideness.

Ergo, all two-dimensional copings with systems are inherently inadequate and prophetically vititated.

Wow.

So, first is... I'm...

going to link it to free energy principle and active inference but there might be other ways to link it everything that's inside the system what happens when you go from zero to one what happens when you go from a billowing piece of fabric to closure or a membrane or a social graph or a governance graph financial graph well you all of a sudden instantiate two classes of variables that couldn't be divided before

Now you can divide into inside and outside.

Once you have a country, you have people who are inside it and people who are outside it.

So when you make the border and you close it, that's what happens.

At once you get inside and outside.

Then he's saying you got different kinds of external states.

This is internal and external states in active inference.

And then he's saying outside can affect the system.

So that sense, that's causal relationships, Bayesian dependencies.

Outside has its own causal relationships.

Like there's stuff happening outside.

We're not thinking that the only thing is the inside generating it.

There is outside, but it can also affect what's inside.

Then

He's saying you can parameterize different subclasses.

So you could have number one could be temperature, and then you could have a two parameter model, temperature and humidity, and a three parameter model.

But then here's what's interesting.

It's fallaciously inadequate.

So is he gonna propose a solution?

Not really.

He's saying you can't talk about inside and outside the background because it's coming at you flatly.

So because your perception of it

doesn't have insideness it doesn't have outsideness it's like the wrapper around you and so all two-dimensional copings maybe couplings or copings i don't know are inherently inadequate and prophetically viditated this sounds like communication through the markov blanket the holograph the chris fields blanket because it's like saying

we can't just have a full bandwidth cable that goes from one brain to another so we have to have reduced bandwidth cable that means that what gets unpacked or expanded

to be at the depth of the generative model of an agent is a thin transmission that goes through the screen, the holographic screen or the Markov blanket.

And then that is prophetically interpreted or brought to life perhaps.

Six.

our omni-oriented halo concept converts the parameter consideration to symmetrically conceptual four dimensionality and discloses a set of parameters inside as well as outside the zone of lucidly considered system stars and the parameters are at minimum fourfold one the concave twilight zone of inward relevancy

two the convex twilight zone of outward relevancy three the stark non-conceptual irrelevancy inward and four the stark non-conceptual irrelevancy outward parameter one is a visible tetrahedron parameter two is a visible tetrahedron parameter three is an invisible tetrahedron parameter four is an invisible tetrahedron

wow so um the system stars that is actually explored in this uh tetra scroll which is a children's book for those who like that genre um tetra scroll is goldilocks and the three bears so the four of them make a tet and then goldilocks

learns by doing and she learns about the tet so the stars like the four stars they're sending their light they could be happening at different times but not for goldilocks who's watching the big dipper for example the tet of the dip is a tet in her mind it's not a tet in the stars but actually it kind of is but not meaning that they exist at this moment outside of where they intersect in the observer

So this kind of relational thinking and having everything be

connected to having a context by default we might say observer by default that's very related to this insideness and outsideness so what are these minimum what is the minimum system what is the minimum inside outside system it's tet but what are those four parameters and it maps perfectly onto internal and external states and then the two blanket states which are sense and action

So the first parameter is a visible tetrahedron.

That's going to be inward relevancy.

That's sense.

That's the visible tet.

so we could go into what the tet is for each sense but at the meta tet here at the total active inference model level one vertex is sense the second parameter is action that's the convex twilight zone of outward relevancy so it it does um radiation and uh inwards and hours of energy it connects that to sense and energy in this way and those are both the visible tets

remember before how there was the four tets and then there was the infinite and the definite what are the two hidden tets invisible tets the invisible tets are the stark non-conceptual irrelevancy inward and the stark non-conceptual irrelevancy outward that's the definite

That's the one that's categorical and specific.

It's non-conceptual.

And these are the irrelevancies.

Those are the ones you can't see.

So it's kind of like the shadow tet.

That's like internal, external states, perhaps.

Maybe there's other mappings.

There's so many fours.

But it's interesting that these four are mapped onto the internal and the external relationship.

We're studying shapes, so it makes sense to study the closure of shapes.

what happens when they close what happens all at once seven the considered relevancy within the zone of lucidity consists of one tetrahedron or more for each considered tetrahedron there are three complementary always and co-occurring parametric tetrahedra we discover our omni halo epistemological accounting consists entirely of rational tetrahedral quantation

so this last one is kind of like a patent claim by bucky he's saying i'm i'm just finite tet thinking only he's saying we did the knowledge accounting we uh we audited our knowledge management system smart contract and yep it's rational tets it's only active inference models we only use the active inference ontology

and those are considered tetrahedron these are knowledge tetrahedra this is moving explicitly into things that are not physical tets because he's um saying that it has to do with the zone of lucidity and the um perception of an observer and what they're considering so this is uh yeah geometry of thinking specific and but generalizing beyond the shape

Eight, by the omni-direction star-studded halo reasoning, the development of a conceptual tetrahedron automatically changes a negative yet invisible tetrahedron into the non-simultaneous, non-conceptual finite universe comprehensive to the local de-finite conceptual system.

So crouching tet, hidden dragon.

You got the hidden cause, that's the hidden tet.

because it has to be a system to be a cause quote really then it enacts like a sensory tet with sense and action internal external states that's a different tet that hinges on this other tet and um then that is what changes something that's general and abstract

through enacting embodied something that's scenario that specific system it becomes non-conceptual it doesn't become uh a statistic it becomes an experience so it goes from being non non-enacted but conceptual to something that is enacted and not a concept anymore and that's what changes that's comprehensively to the local system

So each local system, kind of like mind and body, is going to have physical part and metaphysical part.

But then this is describing a sort of transmutation of something that's general or metaphysical or implicit or latent into something that's non-conceptual because it's specific.

Point nine.

The HALO concept is that of an omnidirectional complex high-frequency Doppler-affected hypothetical zone experience in an omnidirectional universal maelstrom of non-simultaneous near and far explosions and their inter-accelerating and refractive wave frequency patternings and complex precessionally induced local orbitings.

The omni interactions impinge on your nervous system in all manner of frequencies, some so high as to appear solid things, some so slow as seeming to be absolute voids.

Nice.

Funny, bucky stuff here.

So, again, you can kind of jump in anywhere in this sentence.

The precessionally induced local orbiting, whether you think of a bicycle wheel or the slinger of a...

throwing device or planet in orbit, these are being, that sort of physicality is being linked to these near and far explosions.

That's the stars in different places.

Like the moon is getting to you at the same, there is a simultaneous moon and Polaris,

coming to you live right now when you're watching only when you're watching not when you look away not if you weren't there but only right then that doesn't mean the stars aren't there they're not also connecting to each other it just means it only becomes a tet like that when you're there so that is going very deep into relational and tetrahedral thinking and he's saying basically the tet

is what allows us to swim in the universal maelstrom of all these explosions going off in different places.

They're all hitting your nervous system.

And then operationally, we see certain things and we can act within certain spatial temporal scales.

And because of that, it isn't too surprising that our umwelt has mapped onto our affordances.

We perceive the things that we think we can do.

and so that's always changing as instrumentation changes and as technology changes and language and all these other tools so that's why it matters to start with what's physical because it grounds us in the generalities and checking whether our generalities are actually mattering and being true with respect to how we think about bigger things all right then last section here and then this is going to kind of take us to the next piece 10 and 11.

because spherical sensations are produced by polyhedra arrays of interferences identified as points approximately equidistant from a point at the approximate center and because the mass attractive or repulsive relationships of all points with all others are most economically shown by chords and not arcs the spherical array of points is all interconnected triangularly by the family of generalized principles being operative as universe

which produces very high frequency, omni-triangulated geodesic structures, which are an aggregate of chords, triangularly interconnecting all the nearest surrounding points whose vertexly converging angles always add up to less than 360.

Couldn't help but end the section with a final dig at that error.

He's saying, once you get it out of your head, that there's things that converge functionally to spheres, like balloons or something like that.

Or you could make a very, you could make, you know, a sphere, like this is going to be, you know, within some precision.

You can't put this in a physics experiment, but you can put this in your hand and you can't tell the difference.

He's saying, once you go finite,

And you think, well, yes, I do believe that as you add more vertexes to a finite thing, you're always going to get this sort of radial tuck where you need, each vertex can't be magical and can't like close the sphere magically in the physical world.

So it's okay to generalize that in one way, but if you anchor in how shapes actually seem to assemble, then

it wouldn't be that the universe wouldn't be that the arc of justice is bent smoothly it's that the omni-triangulated geodesic trajectory which is specific and finite like a train on rails

is an aggregate of chords, maybe like a bundle, or maybe like a fracture, triangularly interconnecting, so not curving, just going triangularly, because everything's kind of, the smallest polyhedra is going to be a triangle.

If you're going to connect three things, you're going to get triangles.

So if you're just connecting two and they're alone, then okay, you have a little line chunk.

But if you have three events, you have a triangle,

Again, it doesn't mean that the first and the third one are touching because it's a triangle in the thinker's mind.

But they still have to follow these rules if they want to be in line with action in the real world, aka what's operative in universe.

All right, that's it for 535.

Wait, is it on section?

Wow, look at this.

Slide 535 on my deck.

You can't see it, but it actually is.

Slide 535 is on 535.

right let's go to the second part which is angular topology after talking about angles and about uh oh yeah we can return to a few ideas but after talking about angles and how things are connected in the halo principle and bucky voicing his descent with this sort of continuum model that he thinks totally is a cop-out at the end

in the infinite case and infinitely big and infinitely small he's like it's finite on both especially with how we have to model it if not really and then they're saying well it may or may not be infinite at either end but we should model it like it is that sounds like a pretty strong claim no good see look 534 was this one so it was the exact same 224 angular topology

right so this is quote earlier in synergetics which is why it's one of those books that doesn't have to be read in its linear order because this is earlier but you'll see that it's going to be very conceptually related so it's the principle of angular topology because synergetics is dynamic vectorial geometry so here is going to be talking about angular topology which brings those things together definition of the principle of angular topology

when expressed in terms of cyclic unity the sum of the angles around all the vertexes of a structural system plus 720 degrees equals the number of vertexes of the system multiplied by 360 degrees so this is very related to what we previously saw and i'm just going to show the figure table 224 first just so that you can if you want to pause it and just look and read this is what the equation is s plus 720 equals

360 of X number of vertexes, not X to the nth power, but just using his notation.

And you can pause here.

You can look at how this all adds up, but let's read through the text and then we'll return to this when we've kind of heard it a little better.

So he's basically defining a rule, a generalization saying, I found this was true for one, two, three, and let's just take it as an operating pattern until it's shown not to be.

What is it mean?

Three, all local structural systems in universe are always accomplished by nature through the elimination of 720 degrees of angle.

This is the way in which nature takes two complete 360 degree angular tucks in the illusory infinity of a plane to render systems locally and visibly finite.

The difference between visually finite systems and illusory infinity is two cyclic unities.

So this is jumping back and forth within and between sentences, two mappings.

So the first mapping is again, he can't let it go.

To go from the plane into the sphere.

going to need to make closure so we're talking about this closure of shapes and because we're thinking about the shapes as the relevancy of different ideas again in maybe in the real world maybe just in our minds but the relevancy of the ideas having functional closure is a lot like closing a shape because synergetics is the geometry of thinking and so he's saying the way that nature is going to do that

is by removing 720 degrees so for him the sphere is not closed he's like look there's other there's two options for this physically either it has a hole in it and that's where you're stashing all of that excess angle or so it's kind of like a backpack or it's actually just a little bit it's like 359.01 you know whatever it happens to be right around each vertex but there's many vertices

And so to make inside and out, to make internal states, external states, Markov blanket, to do active inference, to do info thermodynamics, you have to close the system.

That doesn't mean there's not an extremely permeable and influential boundary.

It means there has to be delineation.

And that is analogous to the way that shapes close.

And so the closure of shapes we know takes out 720 degrees.

That's this equation right here.

That's two unities, two 360s, two circles.

And then the tet is like a double circle because the tet's angular sum is 720.

See, 180 times four.

So this 720 is like two 360s.

Four.

So when you got the hidden Tet Crouching Dragon, whatever it was, when you have the visually finite system, the manifest Tet, the difference between the plane and the closing it like an origami into a closed Tet, 720 degrees, they got to go somewhere.

And it's not going to get there with a sphere.

Four, structural systems are local, closed, and finite.

They include all geometric forms, symmetric or asymmetric, simple or complex.

Structural systems can have only one inside and only one outside.

Two or more structures may be concentric and triangularly interconnected to operate as one structure.

Big.

Inside and outside.

if you're ever lost or wondering you can only have one inside and outside in and out there's only one because it's defined by a specific boundary and then it's no worries if you have two different structures and okay well you can be inside of California but outside of Nevada okay

But there's other relationships with formal entities where one is nested within another.

And he's saying, yes, they can nest.

They can also do collective behavior.

So they can go laterally, Stigma G, collective behavior, up and down, nested systems, Haken's synergetics, probably, the other synergetics.

this is like saying we're going to have systems as structures minimum 10 and they can do collective behavior they can nest and we're going to even do that geometrically five

And if we're going to do it geometrically, that means we have to take this 720 degree closure seriously.

So saying, oh, we'll have the ants forage in a sphere.

Well, you could say they'll all head out in a random direction and it will approximate a 500 point sphere about.

Fine.

That's D finite.

But the ants will never generalize into a sphere outside of an observer in their mind as they tune the number of ants in the simulation.

Five, the difference between the sum of all the angles around all the vertexes of any system and the total number of vertexes times 360 as angular unity is 720, which equals two unities.

The sum of the angles of a tetrahedron always equals 720.

tetrahedron may be identified as the 720 differential between any definite local geometrical system such as greek solid geometry and finite universe nice solid geometry greek style here and basically he's saying well what's missing in like the the triple error of the continuum model whatever all the things that go wrong with the sphere model like taking the observer out

taking the tuck away, introducing this idea of the infinitely small and potentially even the infinitely large and the infinitely straight and curved, all this sort of stuff like that.

He's saying, you just got to deal with that 720 that's missing in the sphere by recognizing that it's just, again, it's on the finite continuum extreme of high vertex polygons, not magic.

And then the 720 is the TET.

It's just like, if people put a bunch of numbers in equations, let's just imagine, you know, normal 1900s thinking, non-bucky, they put a bunch of numbers in an equation and they got 3.1415... They might just put pi in that equation and think like, oh...

pi does it again or e does it again it just came up in this equation so once there's like an equivalence between pi and some number you know 3.14 etc then people cannot even take them to mean each other so for bucky for whom the closure of the tet is so primary and it's so associated with a 720 degree closure notably

that's the only one that has this ratio of one half 720 to 1440 because it's 180 over four one or i'm sorry 180 times four and 360 times four so basically here the tuck the 720 tuck that every shape must deal with

is half of the Tet.

So the Tet is like the as above, so below, or it's like the minimal Markov blanket because it has a certain symmetry with as much Crouching Tiger as it is Hidden Tet.

It's both.

It's on the gray zone of existence, but that's why it's the minimal existence because it's kind of half hidden.

That's the two and the two, the 360 is the circle unity.

So it's two,

times definite there's two circle unities that are definite and then there's two hidden circles but every shape has the two hidden circles but the tet is the smallest shape and it only has two visible circles because it has this 720 degree vertex situation six a line has two vertexes

with angles around each of its vertexial ends equal to zero degrees.

The sum of these angles is zero.

The sum of the vertexes two times angular unity 360 is 720.

The remainder of zero from 720 is 720 or two unities or one tetrahedral QED.

So here he's kind of taking it even back a step.

He's saying, let's look at the line.

So the line is not even a quote shape, but it does have two vertexes.

That's how it defines it.

the angles at each of the vertexes are zero.

I think some people probably use the word vertices, but I was reading Cosmic Fishing that they used vertexes and that's how they used it.

So I'm going to read it how it is.

the sum of the angles of these non-angles is zero.

So then two times what is not covered, you know, the total pie not eaten, it's like there's two latent circles on one on each side of the line, and that's like a hidden two unities, 720.

That's a tet.

So there's just hidden latent geometry in the line.

Nothing has emerged.

Triangle 7.

The three angles of one face of a planar triangle always add up to 180 as a phenomenon independent of the relative dimensional size of the triangle.

One half of definitive cyclic unity is 180.

Every triangle has two faces.

It's obverse and reverse.

Unity is 2.

So we note that the angles of both faces of a triangle add up to 360.

Externally, the sum of the angles around each of the triangle's three vertexes is 120, of which 60 is on the obverse side of each vertex.

For a triangle, like a line, if it exists, is an isolatable system always having positive and negative aspects.

So the sum of the vertexes around a triangle, 3 times 360, equals 180.

The remainder of 360 from 180 leaves 720 or one tetrahedron.

QED.

QED indeed, Bucky.

Great logic.

So he's saying, even if you imagine

a little flatland fantasy with a triangle, you still have to play by the general rules.

No special cases for Bucky.

It's special because it does the generalization in a new way and exists.

Now, if it's special but doesn't exist, that's great.

It's a fantasy.

But for him, what's cool is what exists and what's special about how it actually exists.

So how are we gonna stick with this whole pattern

and maybe do it in a way that people might not expect so first he kind of grants conventional thinking a bone he says okay yeah if you look at a triangle the inside sure it's 180 degrees and that is what defines triangle in your mind um but that's only one half of a cyclic unity so you haven't even closed the circle let alone the sphere but you haven't even closed the circle with this 180 joke

So you need to think about the triangle having a forward and a reverse, obverse and reverse, because it's like two triangles latent with each other.

Then it's 360.

So well done, Bucky.

I hope I'm interpreting that right, because that's pretty funny if it's true.

And then if you go on the outside,

Now, if you think that this is 60, equilateral triangle, so 60 degrees on the inside, that's 60, 60, 60, 180.

That's what most people would think of.

And then he's saying, then the other part is 120.

and therefore there's three circles and therefore the total sum of the vertices is 1080 and so there's one that's visible one circle that's visible with the 180 closure half but it's really a double because of special counting strategies and then you still get all the generalizations and that really reminds me of a little uh

those who are listening for uh have already kind of will be primed but richard ramsey uh a colleague in our book group talks about asking people well how many angles are on this are in this shape just draws an equilateral triangle and then 180 degrees is the answer for thinking inside the shape because you're just focused on the inside

And then the person who's focused on the outside is going to do three times 120, and they're going to say 360.

But then, or whatever it is, I'm just not even going to do multiplication on the fly.

But systems thinking, 540 or something like that, whatever it is.

Systems thinking is about looking at the inside and the outside of the three vertices.

So even though the triangle is kind of yelling in your face, it's like, I'm a triangle, look at me.

These are the important connections.

This is inside, that's outside.

Focus on the triangle, stabilize the triangle, et cetera.

Still, it's just three vertices, especially when it's a triangle in your mind.

And then you always want to think,

360 around each of the three vertices.

So actually it's 1080 So that's pretty nice.

So that's where and then it's like a minority report the two invisible and the one visible Here's table 224 and he's walking through the line example here and then the triangle example and then he's gonna walk through the sphere example, so

i'm not going to read the sphere or the tet just know that he hits on the sphere again does it even more eloquently and basically just says you're never going to get away from being polyhedral so you need the tet closure

and then the tet will just kind of pick up there.

The sum of the angles of a tetrahedron, regular or irregular, is always 720, just as the sum of the angles of a planar triangle is always 180 inside.

Thus, we may state the two propositions as follows.

The sum of the surface angles of any polyhedron equals the number of vertexes multiplied by 360 minus one tetrahedron,

and the sum of the angles of any polyhedron, including a sphere, is always evenly divisible by one tetrahedron.

So this is again going off of this table and generalizing it, testing the simplest cases, including the ones that are purely metaphysical, the line, the triangle, and the sphere, and then generalizing it and thinking of a geometry

of thought that includes shapes that you can hodl as well as shapes you can think of but it's gonna bind them constrain them but really facilitate them all by following some rules

All right.

This is, I think, 10.

These are probably missed.

It's not 81 and 82.

It's 8, 1, and 2.


UNKNOWN:
224.10.


SPEAKER_00:
Take heart.

Descartes is the first of record to have discovered that the sum of the angles of a polyhedron is always 720 degrees less than the number of vertexes times 360.

Descartes did not equate the 720 degrees with a tetrahedron or with the one unit of energy quantum that it vectorially constitutes.

He did not recognize the constant whole difference between the visibly definite system and the invisibly finite universe.

which is always exactly one finite invisible tetrahedron outwardly and one finite invisible tetrahedron inwardly.

So here he's saying Descartes was putting Descartesian coordinate system before the horse because he wasn't thinking about integrating the coordinate system

with the actual geometry of nature and the shape of space so now take all of bucky's railings against this this is because we're in the cartesian plane oh it's the x-axis bro it's flat no it's not flat if it's going to be a real system it has to curve back on itself

even if it's really really really big sphere so it looks really flat like a meteor going through the sky looks straight but it's on a very very big orbit so you got to get that 720 degree closure otherwise you're spiraling no well you don't get it because you know the xyz the axes work because they're orthogonal exactly they work in a limited set of cases the rational numbers

a certain way and they constrain tool development in a totally hidden way because we're not aligning our generalization about coordinate systems and volume calculations with closure.

So all of the ideas spiral.

because they all are on this infinite plane that never links back so that's why we need finite thinking because it constrains thought and before i it's also what allows thought just like beautiful language or chess so some people hear these kinds of constraints and say well what's wrong with this sphere just being the special case well

it licenses, as we can see, a lot of other changes.

It's not just a standalone maneuver to say that a sphere gets to be special and observer independent.

All right.

All right, I think we have time just to rail more on the sphere.

So 11, the calculus.

The calculus assumes that a sphere is infinitesimally congruent with a sphere to which it is tangent.

The calculus and spherical trigonometry alike assume that the sum of angles around any point on any sphere surface is always 360 degrees.

Because spheres are not continuous surface, but are polyhedra defined by the vectorially interconnecting chords of an astronomical number of event foci points,

approximately equidistant from one approximate point these spherically appearing polyhedra whose chords emerge from lesser radius midpoints to maximum radius convergences at each one of the spherically appearing polyhedra's vertexes ergo to convex external joining

must follow the law of polyhedra by which the sum of all the angles around the vertexes of the polyhedra is always 720 degrees less than 360 degrees times the number of vertexes.

demonstration thus far discloses that the sum of the angles around all the vertexes of a sphere will always be 720 degrees or one tetrahedra less than the sum of the vertex times 360 degrees ergo one basic assumption of the calculus and spherical trigonometry is invalid so it's not just you he is repeating stuff i hope or i'm not sure maybe

it looks like it's a different section.

It's just being turned over many times.

And it's why synergetics is something that we can always return to and think about and study, especially whatever worldview we're coming from as a child education from quote, no math education to some specific genres of math education to XYZ thinking, systems thinking,

Montessori, whatever it is.

Kirby was your tutor.

Whatever it is, we can think about how there's kind of different ways we can think about shapes.

And if you think about spheres like these perfect balls that touch at one point only, then you're basically saying, well, for all of the rays I can draw, those rays are going to violate just how lines work.

So it can't be that way.

but it's baked in to the infinitesimal.

It's baked into this idea that the sphere doesn't have to play by the rules of polyhedra.

Why?

Oh, because there's infinitely many points.

Wait, so there's infinitely many?

But what about on this, quote, sphere?

Well, no, not on that one, but on the other one.

Which one?

In your mind.

Oh, okay, cool, in your mind.

12, cyclic unity.

We may also say that where unity, 1, equals 360 degrees, 180 degrees equals 1 half unity, 1 half, and that 720 equals 2 times unity.

Therefore, we may identify a triangle as 1 half unity and a tetrahedron as cyclic unity of 2.

As the sum of a polyhedron's angles, 720 is unique to the tetrahedron.

720 is the angular name of the tetrahedron.

720 is two cyclic unities.

The tetrahedron is the geometrical manifest of unities plural and at minimum two.

The tetrahedron is two-ness because it is congruently both a concave tetrahedron and a convex tetrahedron.

Very nice.

So this is also where we can think about radians or other measure systems.

What was it?

The tau, tau day, pi day.

That was a meme back in the day.

So let's just say that unity, not the number one, but unity, you can think of it maybe as number one, but unity equals 360 degrees.

So we're going to make like a little mapping.

Whatever 360 degrees means for the classical geometry, we're going to call that, quote, unity, you know, variable in R or Python.

Unity equals 360 degrees.

So unity over two, half unity, is 180.

And 720 is therefore 2 unity.

Okay, just a claim.

Then he's going to identify a triangle with this 180 because the triangle uniquely maps to 180 in the sum of the internal angles.

And a tetrahedron uniquely maps to 720 in the sum of its angles as shown here.

Right there.


UNKNOWN:
4, 720.


SPEAKER_00:
180 times 4.

Then, 720 is unique to the Tet.

It's the minimal system.

That's one thing that makes it special.

And another thing that's special about it is it has the lowest sum of the polyhedral angles.

It's like, oh, well, they were the first one in line and they have the lowest number.

So it's kind of a little bit how it has to be, but that's what the Tet is.

So basically we can just call 720 tets.

They're kind of like a call sign for each other.

So instead of saying, well, we took away two circles of angles, instead of saying we took away four pi radians or whatever it is, or 360 degrees, 720 degrees, we took away two tets.

We can use it just like a variable.

So it's just like speaking so the other person understands you and maybe even more, maybe so they build on what you're saying.

It's not about any number of other things that might be brought into the picture only.

One of a lot of different things happening with our conversations.

So we can say that 720 is like, wow, he did a 540 kickflip.

That was three quarters of a 10.

So we could reference 720 as a tet in its angular capacity, just like 360.

Oh, he did a full circle.

He did the 180, or as Jason Kidd said, I think, we've turned this team around 360 degrees, which is to say we're facing the same direction.

We did a circle, turned in a circle.

So we could say he turned in a tet, two spins.

So then even if we don't use degrees, like 360 degrees, like who knows where that came from, right?

Or who does?

Seriously, who does?

Instead of that, we could use radians or we could have the tet and then have half of a pizza would be like a quarter tet of pizza.

So then, you know, you would just know that one tet was going to be two pizzas, so to speak.

The tetrahedron is the geometrical manifest of unity is plural and at minimum is two because you don't have unity.

You don't have unity in diversity without diversity.

So it has to be plural.

Otherwise there's nothing to unify.

It's like a monistic absolutism.

The tetrahedron is two-ness because it is congruently both a concave tetrahedron and a convex.

So the tet is kind of like painted on itself

in 3D, quote 3D, could be 4D, just like the triangle, as he kind of suggested here, seven, it's kind of like a double triangle.

Like it has to have a front and a back.

If you had to paint it, you'd have to paint the front and the back.

And the Tet, if you had to paint it, you'd have to paint the inside and the outside, and they would take the same amount of paint.

So that's what's special about Tet.

right that is it for this section on angular topology so this has sort of been a halo principle and angular topology i thought made sense together because they're both focused on this shape closure idea and about how angular considerations for observable polygons should extend below the polygon and out to our biggest conceptioning of universe

Ergo, we should be thinking finitely in terms of inside and outside, which is just too good to be true with, of course, active inference, free energy principle, internal states, external states, latent causes, sense action, cybernetics.

Great times.

Then the last section of the text to go into today is going to be Biospherical Patterns.

And this is going to be a few slides where we kind of take some of those ideas that were very numerical.

Even though we could have reread every 180 as half unity, and maybe it would have sounded more like prose instead of like a math textbook, now we're gonna talk more about the way that this geometrical thinking is gonna tie into biological thinking and biomimicry in design.

So instead of starting by reading, I'll just drag on 505.41.

It's called Involution and Evolution.

So you hear biologists talk a lot about evolution, right?

But not many talk about involution.

And it's just going to lag a second, but it will load.

It's a large PowerPoint, unfortunately, or Google Slides.

So in this figure, there are going to be several biological systems.

Here we go.

So we can almost...

have multiple interpretations of what each of these are so i don't want to constrain it even too much with what they are but we see something like an apple with a core we also see the earth with its electromagnetic core potentially looking like an apple and then there's other toroidal structures like um maybe a mushroom cloud exploding like a large explosion but maybe it's like a sunflower or it's a fungus or it's a seashell

And then on the top left, it could be an ant foraging trail.

It could be like a tree that is sort of energetically moving up and drops its seeds down and then regenerates beneath it and grows a biodiverse community that's more resilient.

Here are some knots.

and weavings which uh we can kind of refer back to in the text so 105.20 biospherical patterns here we see the interplay of all the biological systems wherein all the life accommodating organisms of earth's biosphere are exclusively regenerated by energy sent to earth by radio from the energy broadcasting stars

but most importantly from the star sun by which design science systems the terrestrial vegetation and algae are the only energy radio receiving sets so bucky's saying uh that basically the earth as a you know

uh spaceship Earth what is it like to be on a spaceship I don't know you tell me as a spaceship Earth is getting energy from the sun that's very true and other stars but the sun to a large extent that's why it's brighter in the day quote darker at night at least in some wavelengths uh that is energy that's not just from the sun directly to us but rather through photosynthetic life

21, you and I and all the other mammals cannot live, missing word perhaps, or typo in the PDF, by sunbathing, you and I and all the other mammals cannot by sunbathing convert sun's energy to direct life support.

Nevermind.

In the initial energy impoundment of the powerful sun energy radiation's exposure of its leaves and photosynthesis,

the vegetation would be swiftly dehydrated were it not water cooled.

This is accomplished by the vegetation putting its roots into the ground and drawing the water by osmosis from the ground and throughout its whole system.

Finally, to atomize it and send it into the atmosphere once more to rain down upon the land and become available once more at the roots.

So that's another probable interpretation of this top left, which is the...

stem of the plant is drawing water upwards it's evapotranspiring through leaves to cool even in the desert it's one of the main reasons why plants need they have to open their pores to exchange gases but they also cool with evapotranspiration and it's actually that movement upwards in a regenerative capacity

is what stabilizes and generates ecosystem scale and world scale climate patterns.

Is the algae not just burning the O2, but being part of a regenerative cycle where it's ending up driving cycles that go beyond its own use because plants do use oxygen.

They just also release more than they make.

22, because the rooted vegetation

So just to give one more little line of context, we're thinking all of a sudden, kind of like a context shift.

This is a very qualitative section.

It's about ecology.

This is kind of like reading more like somebody who's walking through nature in their backpacking, but they also think about geometry sometimes, like in other parts of the book.

So 22, because the rooted vegetation cannot get from one place to another to procreate,

All the insects, birds, and other creatures are given drives to cross-circulate amongst the vegetation.

For instance, as the bee goes after honey, it inadvertently cross-pollinates and inter-fertilizes the vegetation.

and all the mammals take on all the gases given off by the vegetation and convert them back to the gases essential for vegetation.

All this complex recirculatory system, combined with, and utterly dependent on, all the waters, rocks, soils, airs, winds, sun's radiation, and Earth's gravitational pull are what we have come to call ecology.

so he's starting ecology from this regenerative perspective which is something i see and hear a lot in the work of some of my biomimicry colleagues like some of our facilitators at complexity weekend who really bring out that regenerative systems approach it's like if we want to have a regenerative system we have to think about how it's going to regenerate not just

Figure that part out later.

That's not how ecology does it.

And that's not how ecology got to where it got.

23.

As specialists, we have thought of all these design programmings only separately as a species and as independent linear drives, some pleasing and to be cultivated and some displeasing and to be disposed of by humans.

But the results are multi-orbitally regenerative and embrace the whole planet as the wind blows the seeds and insects completely around Earth.

Oh, actually, I had one more point on the bee.

So here...

Bucky's saying the ecosystem is total.

The ecosystem, it's the rocks, it's the air, the water, the cycles.

Ecology is transdisciplinary.

It's human action, of course.

It's all of scenario on spaceship Earth.

So ecology doesn't have departments.

Why should the uni, for example?

So he's saying ecology is this transdisciplinary thing.

and so when we separate as specialists into species it's right there in the word special in fact genus is genius that's the general genius doesn't mean smart although some people could use it that way but it means the general and then species is the specifics so he's saying

We are specialists.

We've been taught to be specialists.

Even people who say, well, I took a lot of courses in college or I went to many, we're still in a mode of thinking of speciization.

Oh, who's the specialist I should call or what do we need to specialize on here?

Not that every single person is, so no one's impugned here.

I'm just saying this is what Bucky is characterizing archetypally as the sort of factory education system.

And that made us think about the specifics in ecology, the species.

And some species are great.

I like giraffe and this newt.

And some should be agriculturally cultivated.

Some should be hunted wild.

And some could be displeasing.

Oh, well, you know, the mosquito is bad.

Just the world would be better without mosquitoes, right?

We hear this all the time.

So let's just get rid of the part we don't like.

Let's get rid of the species we don't like.

Let's get rid of the subspecies we don't like.

Let's get rid of the specific thing we don't like.

No, Bucky is saying you got to think about how it's a system and you can't take out the species you don't like.

However, you can do anticipatory design in the system at a leverage point so that what you do like happens.

So let's think about the bee.

now I'm not really one for worrying about what bees do or don't want so whether it's inadvertent to the bee doesn't matter to me and uh it's too easy to get hung up on intentional on either side of the issue just so I'm just kind of reading it loosely we're just going with what Bucky said just like when he says the bee goes after honey it's teleologically it is after honey but

that may or may not be neurobiologically what's happening for example it might be going after nectar or water or pollen more specifically because honey is something that's made in the colony but we kind of see where bucky's going and there's a nice figure i think in um dr sherry clark's dissertation on social synergetics of the bee foraging getting the nectar and the pollen and then precessionally

It's pollinating inadvertently, precessionally, and that's regenerative.

It regenerates the bee colony and the flower that they have this relationship that's symbiotic over evolutionary time and allows for win-win and totally novel forms of social organization to arise like the eusocial insect colony couldn't have arisen without a way to store food and provision larva.

So at least not in a way it did.

And so that relationship, which is multi-orbitally regenerative in the smallest action inference loop with the foraging honeybee, honeybee just trying to get that nectar going back and forth, but then precessionally it ends up pollinating.

And so it's that local action inference loop that precessionally benefits the system.

Like, oh, you're just scrolling and clicking on what you think is an interesting idea or not.

But it turns out in the backend, you're actually really helping projects decide what to do with research.

That would be like citizen science, and it would be as natural and play-like for the user as foraging is for the bee.

That's why it'd be information foraging, optimal information foraging and experimentation.

24, seen in their sky returning functioning as recirculators of water, the ecological patterning of the trees is very much like a slow motion tornado, an evoluting, involuting pattern, fountaining into the sky.

while the roots reverse a fountain reaching outwardly downwardly and inwardly into the earth again once more to recirculate and once more again like this pattern of atomic bombs or electromagnetic lines of force the magnetic fields relate to this polarization as visually witnessed in the aurora borealis so that's this figure we have here so

The top one was about the way that we can think of the plant as like this braid that's regenerative through ecology.

Here it's like a young tree with maybe a fire burnt ecosystem and the first seedling popped through and then it ends up starting feedback cycles that are authentic.

And they're not astroturfed, if that makes sense.

And there's actually bees foraging on their own bee will.

to those plants.

And that's why there's more biodiversity and probably resilience and productivity here.

And then we can think about ropes, maybe that will come back later.

And then there's this whole structural pattern integrity, electromagnetism, mushroom cloud, polarization, closure, donut, right?

That's the topology of this, as they say, the coffee cup is a donut, classic topology joke.

30, Poisson effect.

Pulling on a rope makes it taut by, makes it taut, pulling on a rope makes it precess by taut contracting at 90 degrees to the line of pulling, thus going into transverse compression.

That's all the Poisson effect is.

A 90 degree resultant rather than 180 degree resultant.

And it's all precession, whether operative, hydraulically, pneumatically,

crystallography or electromagnetically.

So let me see what, good, I have something to stretch in my office.

So here we have a rubber band and when it's pulled, it gets thinner.

And so if it got thinner, so we can like, let's look at just one of these.

You can measure it against this, this, and then we pull

and it gets thinner, significantly thinner.

So that is as if there's two little arrows pushing it that way.

And I pulled side to side.

So that was going out like this.

And then the thinness was constrained on the plane, the face of the material in a way that was orthogonal and gave us a 90 degree relationship.

So just because we're tight,

lovers here in synergetics doesn't mean we don't believe in 90 degree angles so-called or cubes or even uh like gyroscopes which do balance at 90 degrees but every time we see 90 we think about it dynamically in a procession

like the slinger thrower or the wheel that's spinning or the gyroscope or the orbit of a planet, those are precession and that's how we get the 90 degrees, not through the square, if that makes sense.

31, the inter effect of sun and planets is precessional.

The inter effect of the atom and the electron is precessional.

They can both be complex and elliptical because of the variability in the masses of the satellites or within the nuclear mass.

Planar ellipses have two foci, but to comprehend what goes on in general, we have to amplify the twofold planar elliptical restraints behavior of precession into the more generalized four dimensional functions of radiation and gravitation.

All right.

There's probably a lot to say about this, just like other parts.

here i think it's starting with a little bit of an implicit understanding that the solar system subject to revision 2021 mainstream take i'm sorry is that the planets are not in perfect circular orbits but rather some are more like an ellipse than a perfect circle so if i were to have a shot put thing or whatever in the sock and spin it around it would make

a circle looked down from the top, but the planets, as far as I know, it's really not my area, some are on an orbit that's an oval or an ellipse.

And so why is it that way?

The planar ellipses have two foci.

Now, are the planets also on the same plane?

That is something I've actually always wondered about, or if they're all kind of spiraling and moving,

do they move through the same plane but then that whole disc is moving or is it not a disc and is there any way to find out if it was always this way always this way um so he's saying look down at your hyperbolic geometry graph paper planar ellipses have two foci you define the two foci you get the ellipse that covers them but he's saying

in quotes which is quite interesting to comprehend what goes on in general we have to go beyond planar ellipse like a planet around the sun so whether or not all the alleged planets are in the same disc in the same fried egg at least one planet and the sun that's going to make a disc

then um the electron we don't even need to go there get into that whole electron scenario but it's it's similar and they can have different orbits but i don't know how much he goes into that he's saying we got to think about this precession idea not just in the slinger example but four dimensionally which is going to make us think about radiation and gravitation 32.

All observability is inherently nuclear because the observer is a nucleus.

From nucleus to circle to sphere, they all have radii and become omni-intertriangulated, polyhedrally arrayed, inter-precessing event stars.

You're a star.

That's what he's saying.

That's what Tetra Scroll is about.

Tetra Scrunch.

No, Tetra Scroll is about being a star and being in constellations, confederations with other stars, bundles of experiences.

And this is such a short and beautiful section because it connects the observer, extreme finite, extreme observer relativism

to extreme generality and gives us the way to link thinking dimensional ladders from nucleus so point to circle so one dimension to two dimension to sphere three dimension two four dimensions 4d time lock all of those have radii and they're all like stars

Okay, this is the part I kind of jumped at this section because I like genetics.

So I'm always really interested in what Bucky has to say about genetics, human genetics, but also just molecular genetics.

Okay, 40, genetic intercomplexity.

DNA-RNA genetics programming is precessionally helical with only a net axial linear resultant.

The atoms and molecules are all always polarized and their total inter-precessional effects often produce overall linear resultants such as the stem of a plant.

all of the genetic drives of all the creatures on our earth all interact through chemistry which as with dna rna is linear linearly programmable as a code all of which is characterized by sequences and intervals that all together are realized at various morphologically symmetrical and closely intercomplementary levels of close proximity intercomplexity

On the scale of complexity of ecology, for instance, we observe spherically orbiting relay systems of local discontinuities as one takes the pattern of regenerativity from the other to produce an omni-embracing, symmetrically-interfunctioning synergetic order.

The basic nuclear symmetries and intertransformabilities of synergetics accommodates

Synergetics omni-accommodates the omni-directional, omni-frequenced, precessional integrity.

Epic.

Early Bucky.

Classic Bucky.

So.

it's going to be micro to macro.

So just as this was kind of going from the ultra-finite, ultra-specific system, that's by definition micro and specific to the big and the general.

And that's still finite.

It's not infinite.

It's still finite.

It's just external states.

It's the unknown unknowns and the known unknowns.

And those are more complex than we are.

Or at least we're all nested in a system that's complex.

So how do we get from this macro to the micro and from the specific to the general and all that?

Well, that is how he's going to break down genetics.

So not DNA is a blah, blah, blah.

But he's saying it's precessionally helical.

with only a net axial linear resultant.

Now, I don't know in the 60s, 70s, how much did he know about genetics and its physical structure versus its energetic sort of metaphysical structure.

So this part is interesting.

All the genetic drives of all the creatures on earth interact through chemistry.

So this is kind of, it sounds almost like a molecular reductionist claim, but he's saying that's sort of that prophetic vegetation from earlier.

It's like, that's the Markov blanket.

The pheromone is the Markov blanket.

So if you say ants communicate through pheromones, humans communicate through speech or humans communicate through live streams, it's like for some people,

They think, oh, well, the mystery's gone then.

Oh, I wanted telepathy.

I wanted humans to be magic.

You're telling me that they just have smells and sounds and sights?

So for some people, chemistry and the physical world, which includes the electromagnetic, is enough.

For other people, they seek more.

So that needs to be understood better.

But Bucky is basically saying the actual creatures on our actual Earth...

not Schrodinger what is life, not sci-fi.

The actual creatures on Earth interact through physical systems.

And they're linked in structures that can be amazingly complex.

This...

Okay, on the scale of complexity of ecology.

So this is once you get up to the complexity of a nested system, not just like a cell, but like an ecosystem, we see spherically orbiting.

So what does that mean?

That means two systems are in this procession swinging relationship.

Okay, so it could be like a symbiosis or a prey predator.

Those are relay systems of local discontinuities as one of the partners

in this kind of pulsar pair, takes the pattern of regenerativity from the other to produce an omni-embracing, symmetrically-interfunctioning, synergetic order.

So this could be like the ant colony with a niche modification, or maybe it could be like predator-prey or bee-pollination relationships, or waste relationships with different animals.

But that's a symmetrically-interfunctioning, synergetic order.

that is across local discontinuities but has a higher order and this is where i think the synergetic order parameter of haken comes into play in the ecological stability case here the basic nuclear symmetries so again he doesn't mean the nucleus of lead but that is a nucleus he means the symmetries of having the nucleus uh

As in 32, the observer is the nucleus.

We're nucleating our experience.

So he's saying the symmetry is inherent in that, not the symmetries of nature, although you could argue that it is geometry thinking.

Our symmetries, how we think about systems, our symmetries are going to be scale-free, multi-scale.

They're going to be not specifying scale a priori.

I'm restating it, but that's what's really important about statistics and math and complex systems, active inference, is that it's not like, oh, well, the DNA sequence is the big molecule on campus and then everything else is up or down or within or without of the gene or something like that because it's a story for another day, but that's not how it is.

we can have scale-free frameworks that then can accommodate not just one scale or another, but the inter-transform abilities within a scale, within a system, like a system doing the jitterbug, to the collective behavior of the jitterbugs, and then the multi-scale collective jitterbug, and then the diverse jitterbugs working together.

So we need synergetics to do that kind of modeling.

because it's gonna be happening all over the place.

And there's gonna be precessional integrity.

So it's gonna have integrity that's dynamical because of how there's orbits and relationships.

It's not going to be like a nice little ice crystal, which is I remember Brian Arthur at Santa Fe Institute.

He described classical economics as an ice crystal, very beautiful, very brittle, cold, 50.

Truth and love, linear and embracing.

Metaphysically speaking, systems are conceptually independent of size.

Their special case realizations are expressible mathematically in linear equations, although they are only realizable physically as functions of comprehensive integrity, inter-precessionally complex systems.

And the tetrahedra remains as the minimum spheric experience system.

So systems thinking is scale-free.

It's conceptually independent of size.

It's about systems.

Now, this tetrahedra or this thing in my hand is, if you really zoomed in, it's not a perfect tetrahedra.

So metaphysical tetrahedra, perfect, et cetera, weightless, equal side lengths or disequal side lengths, whatever it happens to be.

But then there's the physical object, which is D-finite.

So special case realization is,

is something that you can measure.

He's saying, basically, you can measure it using linear equations.

And people throw a lot of...

negative words about linear equations, but in the SPM textbook, Carl Friston et al's SPM textbook, 2007 version, it's mind opening because it shows how they do generalized linear modeling and also bilinear modeling.

And if somebody can think of something that does better, that's awesome.

So it's not the end, but certainly not in 2007, it wasn't the end, but there's a lot of very low hanging fruit criticisms of linear modeling

linear modeling, that the low-hanging fruit is not what people think it is.

Like you can't measure a non, or you couldn't model a non-linear system with a linear model.

A lot of fallacies in that camp.

So he's saying the special case realizations are never going to be that perfect metaphysical one.

They're going to be only realized physically.

They're only enacted, embedded, realized, manifested,

as the outputs of complex systems that have agency or have this complex inter-precession happening.

And long live the 10.

It is the minimum sphere-like experience.

So that's because it has an insideness and outsideness, which is fundamental to being an observer and being a self.

51, the very word comprehending is omni-interprecessionally synergetic.

So he gets these numbers for free, right?

So he can make a new paragraph whenever he wants, him and Applewhite.

Why do they choose sometimes to do one sentence sections and one sentence versus one paragraph and all these other combinations?

So we just always read it like it is and think about it.

But he's saying the word comprehending with C-O-M

Prehending, to prehend, to grasp.

Prehension, grasping, prehensile.

Prehensile scoops for grasping.

Robots, comprehending.

They're embodied now.

They're squishy.

Will they understand soft reasoning?

They have bodies.

Will they understand what it's like to be or move?

Comprehending.

He's saying it brings it all together.

It's a great meme.

And then you can say, oh, do you grasp that?

Or am I sketching it out for you?

If you're a visual learner, this is neuro-linguistic programming.

Or does that sound good?

If it's an auditory, how does that smell to you?

Olfactory person?

Can you see yourself doing that?

How do you think other people look at you when they see you doing that?

Bucky knew a lot of this linguistic machinery, which is why it's always important to read him at his word.

All right, last page here for this kind of fun little Sunday 7, so 52.

The eternal is omni-embracing and permeative, and the temporal is linear.

This opens up a very high order of generalizations of generalizations.

The truth could not be more omni-important.

although it is often manifestly operative, only as a linear identification of a special case experience on a specialized subject.

Verities are semi-special case.

The metaphor is linear.

All right, let's look at these two sections and I hope we don't get unloaded.

Okay, we can probably come back to this.

Another day and 529.

matter knots radiation coils matter is to radiation as knots of rope are to coils of rope that sounds awesome let's definitely read this another time what is being uh grasped at in 52 as if he had to warn you is that we're gonna be opening up generalizations of generalizations

what is going to open up generalizations of generalizations this idea that the eternal is omni it embraces everything it permeates everything and so you have like the eternal it's the biggest nesting of time so everything that's temporal has to be within that

People can say that that's a circle at the highest level, or maybe it's a line, or maybe it's a tangled web, but he's positing that whatever the eternal temporally is, that is a big generalization and that the temporal is linear in some way.

Kronos, Kairos, who knows?

The truth could not be more omni-important

Maybe he's saying the truth is the most important thing, although sometimes in a special case scenario, it's very linear.

Like, is it true that this pen is less than 500 pounds?

It's like, yes, it is true.

That is true.

But that doesn't mean that you can generalize saying, well, can you lift it?

It's like, no, because you are in a different room.

So you can't say, oh, less than 500 pounds and I should be able to lift it, right?

So we can't always just go from the specifics to the general.

That's the whole issue is that the measurements don't always project up

to the real system.

That's this whole issue of generative modeling, active inference, because we're only getting a linear sequence of special case experiences on specialized topics.

But we have to act in a way that's true enough, fit enough.

The metaphor is linear.

So he's saying semi-special case is like linear thinking.

Connects two points, maybe?


UNKNOWN:
53.


SPEAKER_00:
And all the categories of creatures act individually as special case and may be linearly analyzed.

retrospectively it is discoverable that inadvertently they are all inter affecting one another synergetically as a spherical inter-processionally regenerative tensegrity spherical Integrity geodesic spheres demonstrate the compressionally discontinuous tensionally continuous Integrity ecology is tensegrity geodesic spherical programming Epic let's enter here

Geodesic spheres.

So we have compressive elements and tensile elements.

So people can look up tensegrity spheres or tensegrity sculptures.

This one that I have here, it's a little bit of a different...

thing it is a tetrahedron shape but it doesn't have this type of rod and tension element structure it could um so what we see is that compression is local like if you have a building with pillars and somebody's standing on top of this pillar but not this one and the floor is not super like a iron plank it's going to just press down on this pillar and not really stress this pillar

not to go into too much of architecture here.

But in tensegrity, tension is distributed instantly throughout the whole system, which is a nice parallel there with social synergetics.

And so he's saying, build the sphere.

You'll find out.

that the compression elements are discontinuous they're broken up it's like a rod and then there's a tension element and another rod there's no two rods touching each other so they're discontinuous but the tensional network is continuous okay

now the metaphor is that ecology is like a tensegrity dome not like a compressive architecture plan for a special case house how is a house special case well it only works with gravity going one direction tensegrity buildings and domes can work with gravity going in different directions or can deal with the wind coming from a certain direction and so

Ecology is like thinking about that tension compression relationship dynamically.

Because remember, we wanted to move into 4D, which is four dimensions, tet thinking, and 4D time lock.

Like things that are happening all at once for them.

And then he's saying, all the creatures are special case.

They're species.

They're specific.

And they can be linearly analyzed.

That's pretty interesting in terms of...

linear analyzability of systems and just remember when bucky is writing this a lot of the stuff that people think of as computation and math today just was not he was foreseeing things happening but um the pc was not around and so it was a different uh mindset a little bit

54.

Truth is cosmically total, synergetic.

Verities are generalized principles stated in semi-metaphorical terms.

Verities are differentiable.

But love is omni-embracing, omni-coherent, and omni-inclusive with no exceptions.

Love, like synergetics, is non-differentiable, i.e.

it is integral.

Differentiable means locally, discontinuously linear.

Integration means omni-spherical.

and the inter-effects are precessional.

Starting from the back, the inter-effects of systems are precessional.

There's a non-linear, dynamical, magical emergence when systems interact.

That's inter-effects.

Integration means that it's comprehensive.

It's integrated across the total sphere of existence.

Differentiable means locally discontinuously linear.

Now here's kind of a funny thing.

Differentiable means that you can tell the difference between two things.

So if they're locally discontinuous, like a piecewise defined function or like two rods in a geodesic, they're differentiable.

You can differentiate them from each other.

But we've been thinking so much about today and in general about differentiable calculus, the derivative, the partial derivative.

And so it's funny because differentiable means locally continuous and linear, but there's other kinds of differentiators that maybe don't need local continuity.

I'm just saying it's like an interesting parallel.

And then love is integral.

It's total.

So you can't split up that integrated, omnispherical, no exceptions love.

So pretty nice, sweet sentiment from Bucky.

Bringing it back to truth, love, good, true, beautiful, the synergetic, great work.

55, the dictionary label, special cases seem to go racing by because we are now having in a brief lifetime experiences that took aeons to be differentially recognized in the past.

Isn't that true today?

Or whenever you're listening to it, is it true?

Leave a comment if it's true.

still what they say, because the acceleration of so-called modernization or whatever it is that's happening, we're seeing more.

And in complexity, we say more is different.

I don't know what else to say.

Bucky's experience with his lifetime, he would always remark on how when he was young, that he traveled only a small amount and then the whole traveling experience kind of exploded in his lifetime and the distance traveled by people.

And he kept on saying, well, people are going to be traveling around the world and they're going to be on skyships all the time.

And then they're going to be taking around the world jets when they're feeling bored of being in the skyship.

Is that what happened in 2021, in 2020?

No.

So it's going even another level meta.

It's another differentiable event.

What was a continuity for Bucky with the speed and number of miles traveled, now there's another discontinuity.

Maybe he saw it coming because he talked about people staying at home and watching YouTube, but who knows?

Does anyone know?

Leave a comment.

56, the highest of generalizations is the synergetic integration of truth and love.

Both of those are deeply relational as well as good.

So the good, the true, the beautiful, the lovely.

Bucky bringing it back to the special things that we can just always have as our North Star.

Generalization and polarization.

Sounds like it's going to be a Buzzfeed article, but it's not.

In cosmic structuring, the general case is tensegrity, three-way great circling of islands of compression.

Polarized precession is special case.

Omnidirectional precession is generalized.

So he's saying tensegrity, if you have tensegrity as your principle, you can build compressive stuff.

But if your principle is compressive, you cannot build tensile things.

And so the general form of precession is 4D.

And then the special case is the special precession that's polarized in a certain way.

Like it's spinning a certain direction.

So,

Nice, good length, more than one, but less than two hours.

And I hope that it was enjoyable for you as a participant and didn't watch any live chats or anything.

So not sure if anyone wrote anything, but yep.

If you have any questions or comments or feedback, it's always appreciated.

Just let me know and I will see you in a future live stream.

Bye.