SPEAKER_00:
Hello, welcome.

This is paper stream number 2.0.

It's October 5th, 2022.

The paper, sorry, just getting the stream started one second.

All right.

The paper that we're going to be discussing in this stream is Modularity, Genes, Development, and Evolution by Diogo Melo, Porto, Cervudrud, and Mariuk from 2016 in Annual Reviews Ecology Evolution Systematics.

and the goals of this discussion and hopefully openings for others to go deeper into different aspects and hopefully provide feedback or the authors or anyone else if they want to develop some of these areas the two goals are to learn about modularity how it's used in this paper and how it's been studied from their perspective and to prepare for the upcoming lab meeting

So some of the big questions that come into play in this paper or big questions that might bring you to the paper are how is modularity studied in evolutionary biology?

And importantly, at the beginning, we'll discuss what kinds of modularity are we talking about.

And the definition that's going to be used throughout is the statistical variance and covariance structure in terms of phenotypic variation, like morphological traits on the body of an organism.

And there are going to be a lot of parallels with notions of functional, effective, and structural connectivity and modularity in neuroimaging.

how is this related to virus evolution and co-evolutions ecologies with different time scales well thanks dave for the great question about how the virus time life span and uh how how different co-evolutions occur when there's something that's evolving a lot faster than the other

And then a kind of related question is how it's all related to studying ants or eusocial evolution and coevolution or studying different spatial scales.

Here's the abstract.

So modularity has emerged as a central concept for evolutionary biology, providing the field with a theory of organismal structure and variation.

This theory has reframed longstanding questions and serves as a unified conceptual framework for genetics, developmental biology, and multivariate evolution.

Research programs in systems biology and quantitative genetics are bridging the gap between these fields.

While this synthesis is ongoing, some major themes have emerged and empirical evidence for modularity has become abundant.

In this review, we look at modularity from a historical perspective, highlighting its meaning at different levels of biological organization and the different methods that can be used to detect it.

We then explore the relationship between quantitative genetic approaches to modularity and developmental genetic studies.

We conclude by investigating the dynamic relationship between modularity and the adaptive landscape and how this potentially shapes evolution and can help bridge the gap between micro and macro evolution.

First, taking a look at the roadmap and some of the sections that we'll be getting towards.

The paper starts with an introduction and section two is methodological considerations.

That is where some of the definitions of modularity are going to come up.

The paper then turns to explore the genetics of modularity over evolutionary and timescales, looking at some theoretical and some empirical results in both areas.

Then section six on system genetics will provide

notion of systems genetics and integrative genomics as helping to approach some of those questions raised in the earlier sections using the kind of data sets that are available in 2016 and beyond.

Then, Section 7 talks a lot about evolutionary quantitative genetics and the relationship between the phenotypic variance and covariance matrices and the G matrix.

the relationship between that kind of quantitative genetic formalism and fitness peaks, and the relationship with local and longer-term intergenerational changes.

Then section A is the conclusion.

The paper starts by discussing what they mean by modularity.

So early on in the paper, they write, modularity has become a central concept in evolutionary biology, Wagner et al.


UNKNOWN:
2007.


SPEAKER_00:
A system is modular if it can be divided into multiple sets of strongly interacting parts that are relatively autonomous with respect to each other.

So this modularity concept is going to rely on

some sub definitions of what it means to strongly interact and be relatively autonomous and so on they write here we will focus on the role of variational modules in evolutionary processes variational modules are sets of traits that vary together and somewhat independently from other modules so this notion of variational modules is a statistical module identification definition it

not on the first pass, is related to variational Bayesian inference.

This usage of variational is just to describe the patterns of variation and co-variation, so the architecture of correlations in high-dimensional state spaces.

and it's a good key question for the paper because there's some other senses that modularity can be used like what aspects of the body are physically connected to one another so you could have two bones that are touching each other and hence modular anatomically but don't have correlated evolutionary patterns or other combinations there

And there's other kinds of modularity that might be meant, like functional modularity in a more practical sense, like two things that have decomposable functional roles, especially from an organizational or a structural perspective.

But here it's about trait measurements and the role of covariance measurements.

And the 2007 Wagner et al.

paper, kind of pointed to as a key citation by the authors, goes on to talk about modularity.

A network of interactions is called modular if it is subdivided into relatively autonomous, internally highly connected components.

So that's going to be a modeler's threshold question.

but it kind of points the direction towards identification of these different kinds of modular or modularity concepts and they point in 2007 to the main open problem is the question of whether modules arise through the action of natural selection or because of biased mutational mechanisms

that's going to be unpacked in some later sections of the paper before we jump into the biology it is convenient that in some recent discussions with active inference live stream a few useful senses and slides around modularity have arisen due to a discussion on the paper a tale of two architectures free energy its models and modularity

So just to point to a few slides from this paper and look at how some concepts from neuroscience and philosophy of science set the stage for this more evolutionary developmental ecological perspective on modularity.

which is going to be more familiar to those with biology background, whereas this area of modularity is less from evolutionary biology and more from cognitive sciences and philosophy of science and also complexity and systems approaches.

So it's by Majeed Beni, and the paper is talking about modularity in the context of cognitive systems.

And there's a longer discussion that one can look at the livestream to hear more about presenting some arguments for and against the so-called modularity thesis, but to kind of pull back from the paper itself, which is not really the focus here.

The big question in that paper was how do we think about modularity of multiple different kinds, functional, effective, and anatomical in active inference and the free energy principle in that case, and why does this matter?

And here were a few different visualizations and images that had to do with different ways that modularity had been used and was being used in different domains.

And to kind of go one level into that functional and effective connectivity distinction,

Whereas anatomical is referring to physical structures and their connectivity in just a material sense, functional and effective relate to statistical patterns of variation, in this case in neuroimaging.

So here are some quotations from Friston, 1994.

on functional and effective connectivity and neuroimaging a synthesis just defining the underlying sections on the right in the analysis of neuroimaging time series open parenthesis or evolutionary phenotype measurement time series close parenthesis

Functional connectivity is defined as the temporal correlations between spatially remote neurophysiological events.

This definition is operational of functional connectivity and provides a simple characterization of functional interactions.

The alternative is to refer explicitly to effective connectivity, i.e.

the influence one neuronal system exerts over another.

So this distinction between functional connectivity

and effective connectivity is coming from neuroscience, but it's interesting to consider in this framework that we'll be discussing more in the biology of this paper, which has a lot to do with multivariate classical, like early 1900s statistics.

So the paper has a really great overview of the history of modularity and also other sections.

It's very broad ranging paper with some very interesting discussions and conclusions.

And their history is really worth unpacking and looking at how the concepts been evolving through time.

So this is a quote from the authors.

Modular concepts emerged early in evolutionary thinking

with darwin's consideration of the correlations of growth where he noted that slight evolutionary variations in one part of an organism would result in other parts also being modified so a kind of key text in relationship to this point is darwin on variation and heredity by rasmus winther from 2000 and who has also written a lot of other quite interesting pieces

And then it's also interesting to go into Origin of Species and look in the section Laws of Variation, subsection Correlated Variation, talking about correlations of growth.

And Darwin defines what is meant by this.

And Darwin writes, I mean by this expression,

that the whole organization is so tied together during its growth and development that when slight variations in any one part occur and are accumulated through natural selection, other parts become modified.

This is a very important subject, most imperfectly understood, and no doubt wholly different classes of facts may be here easily confounded together.

we shall presently see that simple inheritance often gives the false appearance of correlation.

The most obvious real cases is that variations of structure arising in the young or larvae naturally tend to affect the structure of the mature animal.

So a lot of quite interesting details in there to explore, but starting with the detail and then coming to a broader point,

this specific quotation really clarifies cases where depending on the measurements that are selected and how they're defined by the modeler that different values are going to be calculated for correlations of different traits so that is relating to like the correlational structure

is changing through development, yet different evolutionary and developmental mechanisms can lead to different correlations being calculated depending on the statistical design, which is going to be explored a lot more in this paper.

But there are some kind of statistical complexities with calculating a few of these pieces.

although in many cases it's already well established how to use it well enough for local utility for example in agriculture and other areas so it's really interesting to see how much also about uh ecology and development is tied in qualitatively from early on biology

and that's just how darwin phrased it there's other quotes too and of course always important to bring in other perspectives and threads that led to the early days of evolution but this is kind of important texts and so it's interesting to look at what within the main texts of evolutionary biology was already being explored having to do with these ideas of correlated variation

Authors write, later Weldon, 1893, noted that before we can properly estimate the changes at present going on in a race or species, we must know, dot, dot, dot, the degree of abnormality of other organs which accompanies a given abnormality of one.

And the authors write, for abnormality, read variations.

So the covariance and variance structures have to be understood before one can understand how, for example, the response to selection is working in an agricultural setting.

Peterson, 1896, then derived the parameter for describing the degree of relationship between two characters that we use today, the Pearson product moment correlation.

And then here's the citation.

It's a fun title.

Mathematical Contributions to the Theory of Evolution 3.

Regression, Heredity, and Panmixia There was some work by Olson and Miller on the slide here.

And then this was quite an interesting note by the authors.

This in turn leads to evolutionary integration...

the correlated evolution of traits.

The concept of morphological integration maintained some currency in evolution and systematics from the 1960s through the 1990s.

However, interest greatly increased in the new millennium.

So there's more of a perspective on integrated modeling and approaches in biology leading towards the 2000s.

Then, continuing on Section 2 of history, much of this increased attention occurred after the publication of several papers on the role of modularity in evolution, especially that of Wagner and Altenberg and the 1999 University of Chicago Press reissue of Olson and Miller's book Morphological Integration.

Wagner and Altenberg argued that modularity was important in facilitating the evolution of morphological diversity,

If all features of an organism are completely integrated, the parts will be prevented from evolving independent adaptations.

A modular variational structure permits the evolution of complexity and diversity as observed in the natural world.

So here is some of the highlights of the Wagner and Altenberg 1996 evolution paper.

a few quotes from them variability needs to be distinguished from variation which are the actually realized differences between individuals there's some interesting discussion about genotype phenotype map and also by m pigliucci on this topic of the genotype phenotype map and then wagner and altenberg

ask some really pertinent questions for the area which is how is it that extant species acquired a genotype phenotype map which allows improvement by mutation and selection is the genotype phenotype map able to change in evolution and what are the selective forces if any that shape the genotype phenotype map or maybe you could even say mapping of the map

a few resources to point to here here's that olsen and miller book morphological integration so i haven't read that but sounds interesting then there's a few other books about space and time on this kind of topic of movement towards appropriate variational mechanisms and frameworks for describing them in biology

And I point here to the geometry of biological time by Arthur Winfrey and work by Winfrey and others.

And then on the more spatial and morphological side, there's been a lot of interesting work

an early citation is darcy wetworth thompson with on growth and form with the kind of classic images of distortion and geometric and topological distortions and studying morphology from that perspective and looking at developmental and evolutionary patterns onto part three of history and modularity their authors are writing concurrently

Important developments were taking place in evolutionary quantitative genetics.

In the late 1970s and early 1980s, Landy and colleagues Landy , Landy and Arnold reintroduced models of multivariate evolution that had been ignored in evolutionary biology and systematics since Pearson's time .

although they were better known in agricultural genetics .

Landy also showed how quantitative genetic evolutionary models could be used in systematics to investigate the evolutionary causes of diversification on a macroevolutionary scale by providing expectation for the diversification of species under genetic drift and under directional selection.

Authors write, here we review the genetics of variational modularity, its relationship with development, how it can evolve, and its consequences for evolution and systematics.

So some quantgen concepts are going to come into play later in the paper, but first they're going to dive into genetics and studying some developmental genomic mechanisms.

However, in this paper stream, we're going to look at these Landy and Landy and Arnold papers because they're kind of classics in the area, as indicated by the fact that they're cited and cited in a lot of different places.

And also during my undergraduate with Brian Moore and Michael Torelli, Archim Copp, and a lot of other...

Professors, a few of us were learning a lot about this perspective and framework for multivariate evolution.

And I think those who are familiar with SPM will see a lot of interesting parallels, which is why it's cool to see that

some of the frameworks that are going to be pointed towards in terms of change within and between generations in evolutionary analyses have a lot of relevance for studying also some behavioral and neural aspects so first landy 1979 just to give a few points and if somebody

could go a little deeper into the quant gen especially some more recent developments that would be very awesome I'd be happy to do a joint paper stream or a presentation if you can clarify or improve a few aspects because this is just trying to go one level deeper and there's probably a lot more to say and and I don't know make any errors I'll just kind of give a quick overview of it so early in this paper

there's a response to how selection is going to operate in one generation of selection z is reflecting the response to selection delta z being the change in the trait z and then this is kind of related to the breeder's equation sometimes more simply seen as r equals h squared s so the beginning of this paper

sets up uh continuity with the kind of early classical quantitative genetics falconer and earlier and some of those uh times and methods that were described as kind of like uh underappreciated by the authors then landy generalizes some of these equations that are traditionally described in one dimension

into data structures and equation structures that can handle like a lot of traits and it was kind of like what people were doing in agriculture as more traits were being included in models

there were models constructed that had the ability to take in arbitrary amounts of arbitrary numbers of measurements of different kinds and landy's contribution was making that clearer or on more rigorous ground perhaps there's another way to say it but

And also it'd be interesting to ask whether like this kind of a finding, was it expected to be made?

And then this contribution was like, oh, now it's been done?

Or was this an unexpected contribution?

And so people are still citing it because it sparked a lot of research because it was an unconventional finding.

So Tarelli or anyone, I'd be happy to learn more on that.

then here's landy and arnold 1983 and there were some interesting aspects here that about now almost 40 years later are force aging a lot of the way that it was framed in the main paper so they're writing early in the paper natural selection acts on phenotypes regardless of their genetic basis and produces immediate phenotypic effects within a generation that can be measured without recourse to principles of heredity or evolution

In contrast, evolutionary response to selection, the genetic change that occurs from one generation to the next, does depend on genetic variation.

Animal and plant breeders routinely distinguish phenotypic selection from evolutionary response to selection.

Upon making this critical distinction, precise methods can be formulated.

So what's being described here is how differential survival changes the, we can just think of it as like mean and variance of the population with respect to whichever traits are being considered.

So if it's only height and weight that is being measured or modeled, it's going to be like a two dimensional landscape.

But also if you're going to model height and weight and one other trait, then it's going to be a three dimensional landscape.

So all these statistics that are being described are addressing the challenge of finding these variational modules and their patterns of covariance over developmental and evolutionary time, depending on traits or situation that one is using this statistical method in.

And then depending on the heritability of traits, and it's a total another situation and an important one about all the nuance around heritability technically and also from just a historical perspective.

So I know there's people who could just say and help us understand a lot better.

So I'm not going to go into the kind of heritability

area too deeply but just to kind of speak as them as relatively narrowly understood statistical parameters rather than like sort of situation independent statistics related side of like an experimental setup and sampling scheme and so on so again just kind of giving that caveat because there's a lot of applications of evolutionary thinking so

This is why we need to work with G variance and covariance matrices and not only P matrix, trait values or correlations.

So you might have a trait that varies in some specific way in a population.

And let's just say it's related to how much sunlight hits an area of grass.

So the grass ranges from one to three feet.

The instant that you cut it down and say only ones that are below two feet can live, then you've acted on phenotype regardless of genetic basis.

However, the next generation's phenotype distribution is going to depend on genetic variation because, for example, if it was a clonal grass and it was 100% the light distribution that was relating to the difference in phenotype, then the distribution in the next generation would look exactly the same.

Whereas regardless of its life history, if there's a high heritability, again, just like narrowly and statistically, of the height, then in the next generation, they would all be under two.

And then also there'd be the sort of more intermediate situation between...

0.001 and 0.999 heritability where depending for a combination of genomic epigenomic ecological variables experimental manifolds all these issues

within that space there's some but not total inheritance of phenotypic characters and so a lot of this discussion is going to relate to the statistical structures that serve as the data structure and the statistical modeling and testing framework for these data structure that have to do with phenotypes and how different phenotypic measurements are related to each other

So Landy and Arnold write, in an important but neglected paper, Pearson 1903 showed that multivariate statistics could be used to disentangle the direct and indirect effects of selection to determine which traits in a correlated ensemble are the focus of direct selection.

Here we extend and generalize Pearson's major results.

So Pearson's work here in 1903 was mathematical contributions to the theory of evolution.

section 11 on the influence of natural selection on the variability and correlation of organs and this Landy Darnold paper again the technical details would be awesome to learn more on but extends and generalizes some work that was important but neglected by Pearson

So in that Pearson paper, he writes, a slight investigation undertaken in the summer of 1896 convinced me that the coefficient of correlation between any two organs is just as much peculiar and characteristic of a local race and the means and variation of those organs

first just a narrow reading then just a more broad reading first trait values variance and covariance architectures vary over multiple nested scales it's kind of like a translation of how that might be described and it's also important to note there that there's just a ton of history that's really important to also overview

In this paper, I'm focusing just on the formalisms and only providing a few pointers towards more nuanced and important discussion in different areas.

So I'm just describing how things were technically developing, and I think it's an important question to then take a step back from how these different frameworks develop.

But not addressed in this paper, so my regime of attention will only be moderately focused

more along those lines and one can read some quotes here but just to read a kind of again modern day translation selection acts on genotypic architectures via environmentally influenced phenotypic architectures we may be able to partition the evolution of variance architectures into that which is due to signal which is the aspect that's tracking the fitness gradient and noise which is drift

And it's pretty interesting to think about this fitness gradient tracking in the context of some of the recent developments by Dalton S and others in the free energy principle and mode tracking, mode matching, path tracking.

Then some pretty interesting lines from Pearson.

If selection, natural or artificial, be capable of producing correlation, so that's the if claim here, if we accept that, then it seems impossible to regard all correlation as evidence of a causal nexus.

So the next claim is, it can't be

that all correlation is causation that's impossible comma although the converse proposition that all causal nexus denotes correlation is undoubtedly the most philosophical method of regarding causality so not all correlation is evidence of a causal nexus sometimes things are spuriously correlated

including in super nuanced and model specific ways, but aren't they all?

And the most philosophical method says that causation causes correlation.

The proposition

that all causal nexus denotes correlation so is this good do we want the most philosophical method or what even is the most philosophical method that's kind of interesting of Pearson going into a little bit of the details of the Landy and Arnold paper

so they define the set of characters that are being measured on this like z vector so if you made 50 morphological measurements you'd have 50 rows in the vector if you had 128 eeg measurement leads you'd have 128 so whatever different phenotypes are being measured and modeled as observables or hidden states or however else is this vector z

The directional selection differential is going to be defined by them as linked to the observed directional selection differential, S, according to the earlier work of Lush, 1945, Falconer, 1981.

And then the Z star and the minus the other Z, both the bars on them, is the shift in the high dimensional phenotype space before and after selection.

So that's kind of the handling approach is to take...

data operations that might be happening in an arbitrarily large, high dimensional state space, like the number of possible measurements that you might want to include in this type of a model, and then handle that vector like one object.

So it's like a high dimensional trait vector, which can be used as a snapshot and taken in as data, can be generated, and different parameters can be estimated

from that vector then there's another important object that you can probably guess has a related shape which is the fitness variable w and these two

data objects or formal objects in this case s and z coming from the phenotype descriptive matrix which we can just kind of broadly discuss as p phenotype and then the fitness distribution which is usually used with w

and the total phenotypic will continue on.

So the

Landy and Arnold write, denoting the variance-covariance matrices of the breeding values and the environmental plus non-additive genetic parts respectively as G and E. So this is part of the classical quantitative genetic partitioning into G, the variational architecture that has a heritable quote component, again, three asterisks, and E, also three asterisks, because there's a lot of complexity in this.

And one resource just coming to mind now is The Mirage of a Space Between by Evelyn Fox Keller.

And it uses some really interesting perspectives on history and some thought experiments that are really useful.

So one example is like two children who are building a brick wall.

If 100 bricks get integrated, then you can say how many may have been due to one person or how many may have been due to another if it's just kind of block stacking.

But then...

another situation two children were filling up a bucket with water and they both had to coordinate in order to get any water so it was a more cooperative and a less like adversarial or quantifiable or fungible relationship between the task performance and in that case if we think about the genotypic and the environmental features of the environment

we can think about them more like the case where there's coordination and it's like the nature of nurture to be nature all of those kinds of ways of saying it in other words that there's a mirage of a space between nature and nurture though that divisive and dichotomous perspective and framing has been really attention heavy and set the discourse in a lot of different ways

In quantitative genetics, these are variance partitioning matrices.

So interpreting them as the more causal elements of the world simply is equivalent in neuroimaging to describing a parameter of causal influence between two brain regions in the same kind of causal way.

depending on the kind of model and all kinds of other aspects of the situation there's experiments and knowledge bases where those kinds of claims do happen to be aligned like the g matrix does capture the actual genomic or epigenomic or phenotypic covariance inheritance patterns and that's just empirically the case but also there's

woefully underpowered but basically these models take the form of multivariate linear regressions so because these early quantitative genetic formalisms were based in multilinear regression then the same way that multilinear models are generalizable to different numbers of dimensions there's no reason why the quantgen models

wouldn't be generalizable, which again was empirically, as far as I can understand from the text, being understood in the agricultural genetics areas.

And then Landy and Arnold Wright, following an approach pioneered by Pearson 1903, this analysis helps to reveal the targets of selection and to quantify its intensity without identifying the selective agents.

By accounting for indirect selection through correlated characters, separate forces of directional and stabilizing or disruptive selection acting directly on each character can be measured.

These directional and stabilizing selection coefficients are respectively the parameters that describe the best linear and quadratic approximations

to the selective surface of individual fitness as a function of the phenotypic characters so that is pretty interesting in light of the Laplace approximation and the implications there in Bayesian mechanics free energy principle

The authors go on to talk a little bit about where a lot of the work has been.

So they write, while most of what is said in this review can be applied to any continuous traits, much of the work related to modularity is concerned with morphological traits.

So a question to naturally ask would be like, what about behavior?

and so it can be applied to different behavioral and neuroimaging settings but it just is a highly comparable and visible and obtainable trait to get morphological data on different plants animals and so on so going a little bit into how they're representing morphological data they say the traditional way of representing morphological structures is to use a suite of linear distances

The last 20 years, however, saw a shift in methodology in favor of using landmark-based methods and generalized Procrustes analysis .

GPA takes a set of 2D or 3D landmarks measured in a group of specimens, scales all specimens to a common size, and then uses an interactive procedure to superimpose the scaled configurations by minimizing the square distance between the landmarks in all specimens and a mean shape.

so that's pretty interesting to tie back to statistical parametric mapping spm and the early chapters on the image registration and alignment and the authors write we will not discuss approaches that make use of gpa to study covariation and modularity instead we will focus on representations of morphology that preserve local variation like linear distances and local shape variables

So this is kind of a technical point, and I think it could be interpreted as saying that there are more advanced methods for more advanced correlational architectures.

However, this review is going to focus on the morphological, kind of call it like you see it, phenotypic measurement strategy.

And there's maybe more complex statistical models that can be generalized from this.

So this is connecting back to their definition on variational modularity as covariance architecture.

Variational modularity has been used in several different contexts and therefore a wide range of methods for detecting and quantifying variational modularity in multivariate data are available.

Given a set of traits and population,

and a correlation or covariance matrix between them, we might ask, what sets of traits are grouped in modules, or if a particular partition

of traits is supported by the observed statistical inter-trait association.

So nice particular partition here.

And we discuss methods for the detection of modules in these two situations.

So two situations where one is interested in doing statistical analysis on high-dimensional trait spaces and then saying something about modular functions or this kind of variational modularity.

is two situations.

One, extracting putative groupings of traits without a priori hypothesis.

So the so-called phishing or bottom-up approach or open-ended listening and modeling on a continuum with testing if a particular partition

established on different grounds is supported by the observed correlation matrix so one might be interested let's say in healing skin and then there could be two experimental groups that received a treatment or didn't and then the statistical question would be like given the time series data or given the snapshot data we have on the trait value in these two groups treatment and non-treatment

we want to get like a statistical confidence about the differences between those groups or at the very least descriptive uh abilities on the variance architectures of how it changes

Detecting putative modules is very common in systems biology, where traits are frequently expression data for thousands of genes and a priori hypotheses are impractical or impossible.

So an example there is like gene expression analysis, where there might be 10 to 30 or a thousand more

of the loci that alignment is being calculated for and there can be so many different things that can be explored across any subset of just a few loci so RNAC rarely goes into an analysis and the only answer that comes out is like one gene is more expressed than this other gene or should I say locus or transcript so again just kind of glossing over some really important issues on genetics

there still needs to be a statistical test for whatever it is RNA-seq measurements are providing.

Both module detection and module validation using correlations are made difficult by the presence of global integrating factors that increase between module correlations.

So now they're going to continue discussing it.

These are some genomic mechanisms that

are in different situations enabling systems or processes or degrees of freedom in generating modular variation patterns.

So genetic associations among traits can be explained by two different phenomena, pleiotropy and linkage disequilibrium.

So pleiotropy, in our context, refers to the manifold, many faceted or many appearances, phenotypic effects of a single unit of inheritance .

The word context is used here to emphasize the difficulties in finding a universal definition.

Pleiotropy, when defined in this way, is considered an important source of genetic association since it causes traits to be inherited together and therefore to vary together within populations.

So pleiotropy is when, again, just speaking coarsely, one locus or one change at a locus induces changes in multiple phenotypes or their measurement.

A second genetic mechanism by which modularity can arise in phenotypes is linkage disequilibrium, or LD, referring to the non-random association of alleles at different loci.

In large populations, LD will be eliminated after several generations of random mating.

For that reason, LD is considered a transient source of genetic association, except in species with only a few segregating chromosomes.

Well, that depends a lot on what people mean by large populations and several generations and random mating.

And also, it's kind of a larger area, so it's dealt with very...

currently here but these two mechanisms and others in different situations may variously be important for explaining why traits are correlated given the importance of pleiotropy of what changes in one locus influencing multiple phenotypes like changes in a transcription factor that changes the amount of a hormone or changes in a receptor that ends up changing how a lot of tissues behave

Given the importance of pleiotropy as a source of association among traits, one might be interested in the structure of pleiotropic effects of loci underlying modular trait variation.

Figure 1 and the Wagner and Altenburg citation.

So two prominent questions are whether pleiotropic effects are also modular and whether modular pleiotropy facilitates evolvability.

so then they go into a little bit more detail about uh on historical and more empirical notes about how changes in pleiotropic loci can give rise to uh modular evolution

So if one were measuring height and weight, and there was two variants for high and low growth hormone, just again speaking simply, height and weight would appear to be correlated traits, and hence a module, and it could be arising from changes in one loci.

then uh epistasis so interactions amongst different loci that are kept together over evolutionary time scales through linkage disequilibrium or just epistasis in other situations has long been appreciated in evolution only recently has the major part

that epistatic pleiotropy plays in shaping covariation become important so now those two uh branches of epistasis and um pleiotropy are gonna come together

because the way that loci have pleiotropic effects is in their co-inheritance patterns with other loci.

So Pawlicecz, 2008, investigated the allometric relationship between body weight and long bone length in mice, and the authors identified several relationship QTLs, R-QTLs.

These are QTLs that do not necessarily affect the mean value of traits, but the relationships between traits.

So a traditional trait variance architecture partitioning

for GWAS-type analysis, genome-wide association study analysis, would result in QTL, qualitative trait loci, quantitative trait loci, and these QTLs would be identifying regions of interest across the genome that, for example, contributed to femur length or risk of some disease or some behavioral trait.

That would be a variance partitioning exercise using genetic data.

Here, the relational or the relationship QTLs are QTLs that don't necessarily affect the mean value of traits, but the relationships between traits.

So that's the case of like a relationship statistically between two loci that only kicks in under a high or a low hormone environment.

So that the relationship between those two loci is conditional on another locus that's the epistatic interactor.

so this widespread evidence of genetic variation in the covariance between traits due to epistatic interactions provides ample scope for natural selection to change associations between traits and hence modularity patterns okay so here's figure 1a um so on a on the top

Typical representation of modularity in the genotype-phenotype map.

Yellow and orange circles represent modular genetic factors.

Blue circles represent global ones.

The circle in green represents a genetic locus capable of preventing the global factor from affecting Module 2 .

Squares represent phenotypic traits and the arrows represent the relationship between genotype and phenotype or pleiotropy.

so genes then we have this kind of causal graph leading to traits and this again keeping this statistical theme in mind are like a bayesian causal graph where these edges are based upon statistically inferred cause parameters or just hidden parameters describing relationships amongst variables

the actual material basis of the world may or may not have this variance architecture so just map territory all that and in this case the blue circle is a factor that influences across modules always in the case of the yellow module on the left but only conditionally in the case of the green module which is described with that lightning bolt so then the section b of the figure

explores using a visualization style that'll be throughout the paper about what the correlation architecture looks like in the context of this causal graph representation of causal architecture above so this is kind of like the Bayes graph representation again speaking loosely on the top and then on the bottom is like the multi-linear regression

data cloud, which could be in two or more dimensions of phenotype, and what that is looking like from a causal architecture perspective.

So, case one, genetic variation is only present for local factors.

As a consequence, modular patterns of co-variation emerge in the phenotype.

So if these modules of loci, which may or may not actually physically interact with each other, can be selected on independently, which is something that's going to be explored a lot coming up, then you'll get this kind of like, oh, taller and body weight.

Just this statistical module doesn't say anything about the organism territory, the body, or the extended phenotype.

It's just talking about the model and the map.

And between modules is like an even scatterplot.

There's no correlation between modules, but there's positive correlations with traits in the modules.

In the second case, there's genetic variation in both global and local genetic factors.

As a consequence, co-variation patterns are less modular.

So here between modules, there's a correlation.

and within the modules there's also a correlation of these traits so uh it's gonna be like a multi-level statistical model where you have the third grade and the 10th grade classroom and students sitting on the left or the right side of the room and then the height and body weight correlation

so you're going to be partitioning variance architecture to multiple levels in in this case just a multi-linear hierarchical model so it can be assessed using like the hierarchical ratio likelihood test but there's a lot more modern methods that's kind of just the classical stats comparison tools and then in the third case modular co-variation patterns emerge again

as a consequence of the R-QTL preventing the genetic global factor from affecting Module 2.

So now the situation in the top row is recovered because of the intervening effect, which makes it so the global factor is only having actually tissue-specific effects or module-specific effects.

Figure 1c, the nature of gene effects across the different levels of the biological hierarchy.

Here we are representing a case in which a certain mutation represented at the level of genotype causes changes in the development parameter space, e.g.

rate of cell division, which in turn leads to changes in the selected phenotype.

So here's kind of an unpacking using a multiple landscapes visualization approach.

Modeling changes in covariation.

they're going to specify a little bit of empirical models and citations that have used these statistical frameworks so just a few kind of highlights and some of the cool figures from the Pavlichich et al.

2011a paper so they write about that paper

in this model there's genetic variation in the strength of correlation between two continuous traits in the form of a polymorphic rqtl with no effect on the trait mean so it's not a tall and a short locus it's an effector epistatic locus that ends up inducing or relaxing depending on how you want to think about different variants

a correlational architecture between two traits could be height and weight or it could be like two eeg measurements or it could be any other two traits because it's going to be higher than two dimensions um traits that are selected in the same direction tend to become more strongly correlated even if selection is fluctuating

So here's selection, this arrow pointing up and to the right for higher trait values of both Z1 and Z2, but a stronger preference for Z1 moved more horizontally than it did vertically.

And then even though the initial correlational structure in the population

was a negative correlation between the two of them then there in this statistical model was the ability to find a pattern of then that population's covariance architecture increasing

main conclusion of their model is that the nature of pleiotropic allelic effects is expected to evolve to match adaptive patterns of selection so modularity and metamodularity are evolvable via genomic mechanisms and we may have the kinds of statistical tools and frameworks to model that next section development as the link between genes and phenotypes

Biology has largely abandoned the notion that genes cause traits, so understanding the mechanics and regulation of development is becoming increasingly essential to elucidating the relationship between modularity and trait evolution.

There's some discussion on development, and here's one of the papers I kind of alluded to earlier, Genotype-Phenotype Mapping and the End of the, quote, Genes as Blueprints Metaphor by Massimo Pigliucci, 2010.

so the authors write in this section we review recent literature that explicitly addresses the connection between quantitative approaches to modularity that's the statistical variational module detection frameworks and the underlying developmental genetics which are the kinds of mechanistic modules functional modules developmental material realities that relate to the co-evolution and the kind of map territory relationship

um just a few kind of points here the key citation to in the author's view to elucidating the relationship between modularity and trait evolution is this paper salazar ciudad and jernval so that's kind of um interesting and then um a few other citations the albrecht 1991

the Pauli 2008, and the Watson et al.

2014, so just reading the titles of those three, From Genes to Phenotype, Dynamical Systems and Evolvability, Genetica, Developmental Dynamics and G-Matrices, Can Morphometric Spaces be Used to Model Phenotypic Evolution, and The Evolution of Phenotypic Correlations and Developmental Memory.

So all kind of cool ideas and nice citations provided.

And then just to give a few more citations that are nicer and or influential and are interesting, just curious.

One is Dennis Noble, 2012, A Theory of Biological Relativity, No Privileged Level of Causation.

And this is kind of a provocative and slightly blurry quote.

where there's bottom-up and top-down relationships in the causal nexus and nested Markov blankets, etc., and also in the statistical.

So we can think of the brain as having like a multi-scale structural relationship

model.

We can use a multistellar structural model.

How is the cytoskeleton of one neuron connected on up through structurally?

And then there are different modularity descriptors that can be applied to maps of measurements made about phenotypes of those different structural levels.

And so this is a map making about lower levels, but it calls the entire nature of the exercise of assigning a privileged level of causation to any level.

It calls that notion into question.

So it's a very insightful paper by Dennis Noble.

as others are.

Then two other great books.

One is Studying Human Behavior, How Scientists Investigate Aggression and Sexuality by Helen Longino.

And this book's pretty interesting because it highlights some underappreciated factors and integrative perspectives in

in dealing with this methodological fragmentation of the sciences in studying issues of key social relevance and in feedback with their definitions and how different kinds of people and situations are treated so

the more formal slides earlier and some things to come it's going to be a lot about statistical co-variation patterns but let's just say that trait is measured in a specific way so that depending on the temperature or depending on all these different factors of how the trait is even measured before you get to the linear matrix phase in that

Gray zone is where a lot of complexity is.

And Professor Longano points to developmental systems theory and uses systems thinking really richly in that analysis and other important books too.

then evolution in four dimensions by jablonka and lamb kind of whimsical has some drawings gives some good thought experiments and talks a lot about different uh dimensions of evolution genetic epigenetic behavioral and symbolic which can include a creative and cumulative culture like in the human case and language and all of that so it's a nice integrative book and it's pretty fun to read

So in this slide, there's some quotations that are distinguishing between the causes of a phenotype versus the causes of phenotypic variation.

So it's visible here on the screen for anybody who wants to go into that one more level.

And then the second section, incorporating development into evolutionary studies.

So while variational modularity is often assumed to be a consequence of variation in the underlying developmental mechanisms,

explicitly modeling developmental systems or even inferring developmental processes from variational modules are not simple tasks so that's kind of interesting and then um there's a few points on this watson at all 2014 paper that was noted earlier

A promising way to integrate modularity with the underlying developmental genetics in a systematic way is currently gaining traction under the system's genetics approach.

Iroles et al., 2009.

So just to kind of expand a few of these figures, this is a review paper published

that is from Drosophila.

Here are looking across many loci in the genome and calculating different population genetic parameters for different situations, genomic regions, broad and narrow sense heritability scores.

And it's cool.

Look into systems genetics and the development of it is obviously continued since 2016.

And these are just some of the canonical illustration types.

So I thought it was interesting to pull out what representations they were using.

modularity in the adaptive landscape.

So having discussed and characterized modularity and the possibility of its evolution, we will now address its evolutionary consequences.

So that whole lead up was about the inheritance and developmental, so that within and between generation,

causal and causal graph or variational modules of phenotypic measurements in the within and between two generations case now there's going to be discussion over deeper multi-generational cases um

in the context of populations and adaptive fitness landscapes.

Since modularity and patterns of genetic associations between continuous traits is captured by the additive genetic variance covariance matrix, the G matrix, Landy 79, this section will focus in the relationship between the G matrix and the adaptive landscape.

So the question that everyone wants to know, why so much interest in the G matrix?

Evolution, regardless of which evolutionary process involved, depends on genetic variation.

as one could say about environmental variation and the complexities of their intersection.

So this is just possible to interpret even in a really narrow sense, but it can also be interpreted more broadly and situationally.

The G matrix summarizes the amount and pattern of additive genetic variation and co-variation among traits and is therefore essential to our understanding of the connection between genetics and evolution.

Landy, 1979.

Genetic co-variation among traits is particularly important because of its potential to affect their non-heritably varying co-variation pattern.

And NIMBIOS, shout out National Institute for Mathematical and Biological Synthesis for providing a lot of important material on quantitative genetics.

Figure 2.

To illustrate the interaction of modularity captured in the G matrix and evolutionary processes, selection, drift, we display two panels illustrating population averages, G matrices, adaptive peaks, and selection gradients, beta.

G matrices are represented by ellipses of different colors and with the axes of major genetic variation embedded.

So this could be just two traits, or you could imagine this in a principal component space as like the first two or the first n principal components.

Three populations, green, yellow, and red, under the same adaptive landscape, and trait X does not affect fitness.

So the red line, which is the selection gradient, is pointing unilaterally towards larger Y, and the X is not a factor in fitness.

And so the differences amongst these three populations can just be plotted on the same Y-axis, because they're not colliding or moving, importantly, on the X-axis.

Green population increases in Y but decreases in X value.

Why?

Because in population green, there's a pre-existing modularity architecture where X and Y are negatively related.

So as the higher Y individuals get selected, the variational architecture of inheritance makes it so that the population's X value goes down.

And that could be, again, from the epistasis, the pleiotropy, etc.

Population red increases X and Y values because of a pre-existing population.

positive correlation between x and y and population yellow increases y although with a smaller displacement of y than the other two populations so it keeps that neutral scatter plot and it just increases in y but it doesn't induce any distortion from that actual sparsity in that trait architecture

these different responses under the same selection gradient are due to differences in g matrices so one interpretation is going to be like this locus is inducing this correlation or this functional module genetically and then this is the statistical view only

And there's some discussion, again, of unpacking that figure.

Here's the second part of figure two.

Second panel shows the consequence of a flat adaptive landscape, random genetic drift, on the averages of descendant populations, red ellipses of an ancestral population, yellow ellipse.

The arrows in this case point to each population's trajectory.

At the end of the drift process, 95% of all evolution divergence amongst means is captured by the larger ellipse light pink.

Note that there is substantial more divergence along the axis holding the most within population genetic variation.

So this is kind of a visualization that connects the within generation to across generation and possibly meta populations level.

So the ancestral population has the variability characteristic of the center yellow oval.

And then we can just imagine like aliquoting that bacteria into 15 different independent, also selectively neutral, importantly, environments, identical selectively neutral environments.

Then

when we go back and measure all of those aliquots each one of them would have drifted randomly on the landscape in terms of the overall x and y value that they were found at however they would all share a positive trait covariance architecture because that part was heritable

And so this is kind of like a simpler case because we have perfect heritability of the covariance architecture and no special, or not a special, just no selection at all, a flat fitness landscape.

And a lot of the next discussion is going to be about tracking, mode tracking, path tracking on fitness landscapes that are simple or rugged.

this connects from the within population variation which might be the only one you observe like the correlation between milk production and femur length and some cows but then how is that going to result to the selective pressures that are applied on the next cohorts so that's like indirectly or directly what uh these formalisms describe as in the case of so-called artificial or natural selection but of course for a long time been just more generally thought of the selective niche

While it is possible that extant species variation patterns are fairly similar, it is possible that stochastic fluctuations in the G matrix over generations are large enough to render the inferences we might make from extant patterns useless.

So the interpretation would be like, yes, femur and milk production are correlated at this time in this population, but that's actually a fluctuation.

And you're just going to be totally adrift without a compass if you try to use for a cross-generation prediction the covariance architecture today.

These fluctuations are possible for many reasons, like segregating alleles with large effects or linkage disequilibrium caused by periods of strong fluctuating selection.

Bulmer, 1971, and then Torelli, 1988.

While this is certainly a theoretical possibility, the critical question is whether or not changes in G-matrix structure based on theoretical considerations are of sufficient magnitude to affect evolutionary inferences.

So I wanted to just highlight Torelli 1988 as a professor who I worked with at University of Davis, California.

So I just wanted to highlight this earlier classical Torelli baseball cards as he referred to the printed papers as.

So these are like NFT's version of that.

Theoretical work in evolutionary quantitative genetics concentrates on two problems, phenotypic evolution, including speciation, and maintenance of heritable variation on which evolution depends.

I will argue that these problems are decoupled in practice because detailed genetic models do not make useful predictions concerning the dynamics of the critical variance and covariance parameters that enter the evolution equations for means.

So here is discussion in the top part of the paragraph on Landy's contributions 76, 79, 80, 85, and Arnold and Arnold and Wade and others.

He has used what I call Gaussian allelic models to argue that much of the additive variance observed for most characters may be explained by a balance between the introduction of variation by mutation and its elimination by stabilizing natural selection.

Although Landy's papers on phenotypic evolution and genetic variation are often cited together, there is no inherent connection.

Another section of the paper.

Unfortunately, no mechanism or model for the maintenance of heritable variation can ensure constancy.

For example, although genetic and phenotypic covariance matrices can remain constant, while means can evolve under Landy's Gaussian allelic models.

Constancy requires additional biological assumptions, discussed below, besides those needed to justify the basic model.

Conversely, although explicit genetic analyses of the joint dynamics of means variances in higher-order moments imply that covariances will usually change under selection, no robust predictions for the magnitude of long-term change are likely.

For quantitative characters, we still have to determine what genetic patterns exist to be explained.

Until more data are available, evolutionary inferences based on the constant

very interesting and i remember there were some subtle points and ways of saying it so Torelli you're always welcome to give a little more info on what happened since then evolutionary change in simple landscapes this describes some simulations that have been done in simple fitness landscapes where it's just like one fitness peak in the middle of a space then evolutionary change in rugged landscapes

While single-peaked adaptive landscapes are convenient for model building purposes, adaptive landscapes are thought to be very rugged, that is, they have many adaptive peaks and valleys.

This implies that in rugged and multiple-peaked adaptive landscapes, the G matrix can have a major influence in determining which peak will be reached by a given population, even if in theory the effect of the G matrix is microevolutionary.

When the adaptive landscape is rugged and when genetic associations are stable through time, macroevolutionary dynamics will be shaped by the interaction between the G matrix and the adaptive landscape, figure three.

All right, this is a pretty interesting figure.

Left panel shows selection gradients beta per generation with the green arrows.

Average responses delta to Z per generation are the black arrows.

Populations are sharing a similar G-matrix structure but different starting peaks of a single-peaked adaptive landscape.

So the covariational architecture is fixed so that trait X and Y have a positive covariance.

That's why all these ovals are pointing in the same direction with the Y equals X line.

And then there are populations that start below the adaptive fitness peak.

in both traits or above in one and so on and this figure shows that when there's a single fitness peak different populations are going to have different trajectories to that fitness peak like just to speak very simply b is going to increase in trait value x-axis whereas c is going to decrease but there's also more uh nuanced relationships in these differences of trajectories

And then on the right side is kind of like a variance or a corollary, which is here, it's a rugged fitness landscape.

There's five peaks of equivalent value.

And it's kind of like a difficult to optimize landscape because you have to walk through a low fitness valley

Sometimes the fitness landscape can be sparse like that.

And here, those same three orientations and configurations of A, B, and C populations means that they're actually all going to move to three different stabilizing fitness landscape peaks, and there'll be two fitness peaks that are just not observed.

So then one might make all kinds of correlations or observations or fallacies.

So like one could imagine that in this situation, that there would then across these populations be also across species, just say.

Whereas let's just say that the initial setup was such that these three, or these three, not including the top right one, became the occupied three fitness peaks.

In that situation, one might take a regression across those species with phylogenetic correction or not, and find like a negative or no relationship between these two traits.

So it simply can't be the case

for rugged landscapes, which is essentially the case that's being considered in evolutionary time, to ignore the interaction between the G matrix and the fitness landscapes.

Here's figure 3, just some summary statistics on the figure that was just displayed above.

Matrix structures, Felsenstein, 1988.

While this only gives us access to peaks that were eventually reached and are currently occupied by living species, this is valuable information that can help us explain whether macroevolution constraints or interaction between constraints and selection as in the peak selection model.

Under transient constraint, we should not expect any alignment between the G matrix and the selective covariance matrix.

Since given enough time, the population should eventually reach the respective adaptive peak.

Conversely, under peak selection, we would expect an alignment between the G matrix and selective covariance matrix.

We are aware of only two such tests reported to date.

And here's the Zhang 1988 citation.

Here's figure four.

traits will evolve together because they are inherited together, G matrix, or because they are selected together, selective covariance.

So here's a little bit more of a statistical take on the earlier figure and discussing the Zhang and Felsenstein, likely 1988 and later, contributions on that statistic approach.

And finally, conclusion.

So they write, placing micro and macro evolution into a common framework is essential for our understanding of the influence of genetic and developmental constraints on multivariate evolution.

Quantitative genetic theory has long been interested in the variation of landscapes can be characterized by simple and stable selective peaks, or that variational properties are largely unimportant considerations for evolutionary change.

embracing the dynamic nature of variational patterns their context dependency as well as their relationship with genetics development and evolution will allow us to bridge how variation emerges and how it influences the shape of population variation and adaptive landscapes

Another major challenge will be discriminating the relative contribution of constraints, selection, and neutral processes in determining the path of multivariate evolution.

We propose that this challenge will only be met when we know more about the true shape of adaptive landscapes, including the number, height, and distribution of peaks, as well as incorporate modularity into our thinking.

So cool paper.

well written and covering a lot of areas also serving as kind of a jumping off point for quite a number of directions so hope to continue this series and if anybody wants to go into a little more detail on the quantitative genetics and present it on paper stream 2.1 or a future later number

It could be a cool area to hear about.

So thanks for watching the paper stream.

See you later.