SPEAKER_00:
Hello and welcome to Complexity Weekend.

This is the March 2021 Complexity Weekend heartbeat.

We're really looking forward to this opening live stream, which will begin at 9 a.m.

Pacific time.

And until then, we'll have 25 minutes of a really awesome improvised composition by our facilitator, Michael Garfield.

So enjoy the next 25 minutes of some awesome music by Michael Garfield.

And we'll see you soon for an organizer's introduction, some talks from facilitators and an interactive jam board.

All right.

See you soon.


SPEAKER_04:
Help me!


UNKNOWN:
Thank you.

so

Hello.

music music

Thank you.


SPEAKER_04:
Thank you.


UNKNOWN:
Thank you.

Thank you.

Bye.


SPEAKER_02:
Bye.


UNKNOWN:
so so


SPEAKER_00:
Hello, everyone.

Thanks for joining the March 2021 Complexity Weekend Heartbeat.

I'm going to remove Michael Garfield from the stage, but thank you, Michael, for all your contributions as a facilitator.

And I love hearing that song as we begin the heartbeat.

So I'm really looking forward to having a bunch of people on the live chat who are going to be participating and giving thoughts as well as

seeing what you all write on the Jamboard.

So let's get the live stream set up and

Here we go.

Welcome everyone to the opening of the March 2021 Heartbeat.

In this organizer's introduction, we're going to talk a little bit about Complexity Weekend, just as far as who we are and some registration statistics.

And then we'll talk a little bit about the purpose, values, and guidelines.

Then a little bit about today's and this weekend's event.

We'll then hear from some of our facilitators and interact on the Jamboard.

so we can get right into it.

Whether this is your first time or not your first time, welcome to Complexity Weekend, and we're just really appreciative and happy that you're a participant in our community.

Complex systems are about many things, and hopefully we'll talk about Complexity Weekend as a complex system as we walk through it, whether it's your first time or not.

Initial conditions and the history and the developments are really important for complex systems.

So here is a little bit of a history of Complexity Weekend.

Our first Complexity Weekend was in May 2019.

in person in downtown San Francisco.

While we were planning for our, what would have been our second in-person weekend in May, 2020, we had some changes to biosecurity.

And so for 2020, we ended up having an online weekend experience, not once, but twice.

This was really awesome.

We got a ton of great feedback, many teams formed, lots of participants got involved.

and also very importantly it helped us understand the importance of community of practice and having a global and diverse community that then will be able to host local events in the future but for now we can make the best of our situation and connect globally and upcoming on the horizon is that may 2021 complexity weekend cohort so if you're not already part of

that Complexity Weekend cohort, I'm just not sure where my little video icon should go, then go to Complexity Weekend and feel free to register if you haven't.

The two-month pre-weekend experience for the cohort has already begun, but we'll be adding people, so it's all good to join in now at this point.

And the goal of the pre-weekend experience for the cohort is really to get people synchronized on three key things.

And that's the tooling, the ideas, and the community.

So the heartbeat is like a little bit of a taste of all of them because the tooling for the weekend uses Gather as well as Keybase.

But for the heartbeat, we don't really use Keybase.

We just use Gather.

So it's a little taste of the tooling.

It's of course a taste of the community and the ideas and the people when we have participants joining for their first time or people who are just coming back to hang out with their friends from many years.

Another representation of Complexity Weekend is thinking about the total community as a role-based ecosystem, of course, embedded within larger ecosystems.

The biggest circle and the circle that includes everyone is participant.

We're all participants here.

And then we have event and role specific,

roles that we play.

So for example, I'm one of the March 2021 Heartbeat co-organizers, but maybe you'll be a co-organizer in the future.

Here at the monthly Heartbeat, we have just people coming from inside as well as from the outside to their first time to the community.

And that's one big entry point for Complexity Weekend.

Another big entry point are these biannual weekend cohorts.

So twice per year when we have Complexity Weekend,

We have a cohort of people who really have a shared experience and get to know each other in the weeks and in the months leading up to the weekend.

Then they work together, they form teams and they stay connected after the weekend as well.

And that energy is also returned to the broader collective, to the broader circles of participation.

Teams are always forming inside, outside and on the interface of Complexity Weekend.

And then on the top of this circle here,

we see some of the event-specific roles, such as event organizer, event facilitator, which we'll get introduced to soon, and associates and supporters.

This is, again, the sort of spatial role-based representation of Complexity Weekend, and now we can think about even a temporal representation.

Here on the Y-axis, this green line is kind of like community energy.

And so the community energy is oscillatory, just like breathing or like a heartbeat.

It does cycle for the collective and for individuals in it.

But you'll notice that there are big peaks

for the weekends themselves.

Our last weekend online was October, 2020, and the upcoming one is May, 2021.

And then there's these smaller peaks that represent the heartbeat, which are opportunities for the community as well as for new people to be welcomed in and just sort of, again, get a taste of Complexity Weekend, the tooling, the community, and the ideas.

And then the backdrop is hopefully you and your team, or it could be you and your relationships or your mentoring or your personal development, because whatever it is that the community is doing, there's also a scaffold that's being set for you to hopefully discover colleagues and friends and just continue your complexity journey while you're outside of our events.

So that's sort of a little bit about Complexity Weekend at the organizational level.

Let's go a little bit more into detail into our participants, and that's us.

Here, it's a pretty exciting day for us because we're able to show a little bit of the registration data for the ongoing May 2021 cohort.

So we already have over 120 participants who have onboarded into our cohort, which means that they're in the Keybase and they're able to access a calendar of synchronous times that they'll be meeting up with other participants.

And just two aspects of our participants are represented here.

The first is just the geographical variation.

And we have over 40 countries represented from the over 120 participants.

And so there's a couple of things that immediately stem from looking at this map.

The first is that we're going to have to accommodate across time zones, which is why for every event, like the heartbeat, we try to schedule it as two intervals that are at different times of day so that different preferences in different time zones can find this event accessible.

But it's just going to allow such an amazing opportunity to work with the new opportunities, new challenges that we have related to scheduling and coordinating across time zone, but also to make some amazing connections and teams.

So we're coming from so many different physical places and we're able to connect on the internet.

Another dimension of variation that we can connect across is our familiarity with complexity.

Now there's not a single scale.

There's not a complexity thermometer.

This is just a self assessment and people have different understandings of complexity.

So it's not a measurement

of the most physical level, it's sort of an emotional measurement, but it was striking that we have on a one to 10 scale of less familiar to very familiar with complexity, we have a couple in our cohort who are totally self-assessed beginners.

So that's totally awesome and okay.

And then we have several

self-assessed very familiar experts it's great we love the experience but it's almost like an upside down bathtub or like a trapezoid because we're all kind of in the middle of our complexity journey so whether you've read an article or a book or you've written an article or you've written a book on complexity most of us are just trying to learn by doing and hang out together and have fun

Which brings us to one of our big central values in Complexity Weekends, which is that diverse perspectives are key.

And here we just made a few word clouds from some of the questions that we asked people.

And at the top level, we asked people what describes their sector or their background.

And they're coming from so many different disciplines and many overlapping.

And then the long tail has also so many fascinating different areas that could connect and make teams and projects.

And people are also looking to get many different things out of the Complexity Weekend community of practice, ranging from connections with people to new ways of thinking and doing.

That's why we, every single organizer's introduction, try to return to what brings us all together.

And usually I'd be here with some other co-organizers and we could be able to discuss some of these points, but I'll actually leave it to the live chat.

And so if people want to post in the live chat or even comment on our Living Our Values document,

they can sort of expand on this and really co-design these values because it's not just that any single person has written these.

These have the light touch of many, many people.

And what brings us all together is our shared purpose and interest in complexity science, which means learning complexity science as well as applying complexity science and communicating and educating.

desire to have impact on co-created teams and to improve our community of practice through feedback participation and peer mentorship these principles of respect and of viable systems percolate throughout the levels of our organization and our community and we share core values and a desire to develop a community around these core values and as well as our shared purposes for

What are our collective purpose?

And again, it's a living and a collaborative document and vision that we're working on.

But our collective purpose at this moment can be distilled into a few bullet points.

We learn complexity science by doing.

We learn by doing.

We serve through deep time.

We think across spatial and temporal timescales.

and also we include to innovate diversity is key and there's so much more that could be said on all these purposes but again i'll leave it to the live chat and to the community that we all create actually to enact and to realize our collective purpose and then to feed back into these formal documents so that maybe those who are just learning can see it semantically at first and then realize it later or whichever order

Here are some of our core values.

Complexity Weekend is itself a complex system.

Education is active.

We learn complexity science by doing.

Teamwork makes the dream work.

Participation means accessibility and inclusion for all.

Respect is key and we support our community participants to step up and be brave, whatever that looks like to them.

some participation guidelines that we found increased people's experience just the quality of their interactions with complexity weekend we encourage participants to adopt a complexity thinking mindset again that's going to mean many many things to different people and the mindset will itself develop as one's understanding of complexity changes but we're always able to say whatever it is the complexity mindset is that's what we want to be adopting and crafting

Communication is key, which means relational communication one-to-one and also team and group communication.

And because we're online, so related to communication is key is embrace technology, but know its limits.

Use good audio and visual etiquette.

So when we're interacting in Gather, maybe somebody's in a different continent.

So maybe it's a half a second or one second of lag.

Or maybe you want to slow down how you're speaking because it slightly echoes on their side, or maybe resist the urge to mention an author without first putting the link in the chat so that somebody can see the name and how it's spelled.

These are all ways which we can use technology to connect and help include people by doing that.

Full participation is encouraged while appreciating diverse abilities and schedules.

So if you're free for 20 minutes, just pop into Gather and see who's there.

If you want to check two minutes of key-based messages, just do that.

Leave an emoji.

Let other people know that you're active and participating.

however that works for you and if there's something that we could do as organizers to help you participate then we want to learn about that and help enable it for you and for other participants and then we always encourage reaching out on the edges and staying involved so reaching out on the edges we encourage those connections amongst participants and that's what makes the tapestry of community well connected and strong rather than clickish and fragile so follow up

with somebody, send them an email or a key base message.

And just think if each person sends a few messages to people who they meet, we're really connecting and building relationships through deep time.

And staying involved could be coming to our events recurrently or being involved in the broader systems or complexity community.

So in about the next five minutes, we're gonna cover just the details of

the weekend Heartbeat itself just today and tomorrow.

And then we're gonna be hearing a little bit from RJ Corday, who's one of our facilitators.

So this March, 2021 Heartbeat was organized by myself and by Sean Applegate Swanson, a long time co-organizer.

And it was really fun to organize.

We also would like to sort of pin that call for anybody who wants to co-organize a future monthly Heartbeat event.

We've had many participants step up into the co-organizer role, which is not a kind of person.

It's not a way of organizing.

It's actually just wanting to help.

And then we work with you on a team over the month leading up to the Heartbeat because the Heartbeat is the last weekend of the month.

And over that month, we have a weekly meeting, we do some asynchronous work, and you give some of your insights and some of your special perspective to the community.

So anybody who's interested in co-organizing the April heartbeat, which is going to be starting organizing in the first week of April, or a future heartbeat in 2021 or beyond, you can always just get in touch with us.

Another role that's event specific is facilitator.

And we have six awesome facilitators who will be doing a variety of sessions and live stream appearances over this heartbeat.

And you can go to complexityweekend.com to see our facilitators for the weekend.

and many of them are actually facilitators or participants or both for this upcoming may cohort but for the march 2021 heartbeat we have alexandra richard victoria ariadna diamantis and steven who are going to be just contributing truly a global and a transdisciplinary experiences that they've all had to our community it's really special and

We could spend 20 minutes talking about what each of these facilitators are gonna be bringing to the table.

So I would just encourage you to attend the gather sessions if you can.

And if it doesn't work for you this time, or you're watching this after the weekend, you can still get in touch with these people and hopefully they'll be around to do more sessions and to interact with our community more.

Let's just do a few little technical details before RJ joins in about three minutes.

the first is that we'll be using gather as our spatial chat platform so we have some help videos on how to use gather and a few different features that you might expect or not but for now we'll just say that on the bottom bar is uh

the uh availability of a emoji and a screen sharing and a mini map you use the arrow keys to walk around you click the microphone or the camera to mute or turn off your video and there's more settings in the gear you can also look at some other tabs but just play around have fun

we offer co-working spaces in gather for those who are interested in potentially having a bunch of people pass through and just see what they're working on and that sort of working with the garage door open is something that we love to facilitate and gather and it's an example of a unique affordance in gather

Our atrium space looks roughly like this and you can use control plus and minus or your mouse wheel to sort of zoom in or out or click the mini map.

But when you arrive, you're gonna show up at the spawn point and the live session room is right

beneath there going through the red arrows and the bar, the cave, there's so many fun things to explore.

So we'll let you add it.

And also through the contributions of Steven, one of the facilitators this month, and so many others, we've really made this space something that's living.

And so that's what we're excited to do, incrementing between the heartbeats in the atrium space, but then also making cohort specific spaces for cohorts.

And the last technical point before we bring on facilitator RJ is just that the link to the program for today and tomorrow is in your calendar event that you were added to.

It's also in your onboarding email and I'm sure we can also share it in the live chat or if someone is missing it, they can just email us or get in touch

On today, Saturday, March 27th, 2021, from 9 a.m.

Pacific to a little bit after 10, we'll be in this live stream.

And then that's like the tip of the iceberg.

The rest of the event, all of the rest of today and all of tomorrow is going to be in Gather, not live stream, not recorded.

It's just going to be about connecting and having interactive sessions with participants and facilitators.

So check out the link to the program for the most recent information for each of these sessions.

And we'll just update it as things change and you'll find all the links that you need.

We really just try to make a single source of truth where you can bookmark one link for one event and just go there to find everything you need to know.

And for the heartbeat, it's just this single page.

But then for the weekend, we have a few different tabs that help us facilitate and coordinate.

RJ is going to join on in just a minute and I'll just leave you with the bar gather space and the cave gather space and greetings RJ and just invite you to play in gather and enjoy your time there.

So thanks for watching this first part, the organizers opening of the live stream and I will slightly change the OBS and welcome on my colleague RJ.

Greetings RJ.

Hey, thanks for having me on.

Well, I'm looking forward to this convo.

Where would you like to start, or how goes it today?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, today was actually nice.

After three months of being on an emergent collaborative team, part of which was stemmed from discussions at the last weekend, I finally have a publication forthcoming through the Atlantic Council.

A good day.


SPEAKER_00:
Today's a good Saturday.

Yeah.

So what would you like to bring to the live stream or to the community today?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, sure.

So I figured maybe it'd be a good idea today to just like, because I don't have a presentation or anything, I figured maybe it'd be better to just talk about some practical aspects of working on remote emergent teams that are dealing with complex topics.

Sounds good.

Okay.

To the people who don't know me, so as both a deployment strategist at COGSAC and as a non-resident fellow at the Atlantic Council, I facilitate interdisciplinary teams producing research on topics like gray zone warfare, education and knowledge management technology, intelligence analysis, and on complexity.

And like I said, maybe today I won't talk about complexity specifically, but about some of the practical aspects of working on remote emergent teams, which, Dan, you are familiar with, because you are on many of these teams.

So, yeah, I thought this would be the right thing to talk about, especially because the upcoming weekend and for people watching, if you're not attending that weekend, you're going to get a sense of the community.

Maybe it's still useful, but I also strongly recommend you still attend.

I guess the good starting point is that there's some literature and intelligence analysis which suggests something that kind of frustrates me, which is that as the structural complexity of the information environment around you increases past a certain threshold, so like think interconnectedness, confounding variables, blind spots in data, unpredictability in general, there are kind of two natural paths, like water running downhill, that we tend toward.

So we either get withdrawal from the environment and effective elimination, which is usually not fast.

We kind of slowly back away.

So if you want to get a very real sense of this, I feel like talking to people who say like they don't watch the news anymore to kind of get a more visceral explanation.

But anyone that's been on a lot of committees or working groups or teams in general knows this super well, even if they don't want to think about it too much, this kind of slow backing away of I'm not sure what's going on.

I'm not sure what it is we're doing.

Or we actually get increased confidence, which is the frustrating part for me.

So we get faster response times and poor decision making.

And this area of research is under the umbrella of cognitive overload.

So there's some interesting studies on that, like on horse betting, analyzing French grammar, of all things, and on decision making under pressure.

So as you know, I like to phrase it this way.

When the brain can't reduce the complexity of the environment out there, it reduces the complexity of the strategy it uses to make sense of it.

So we start to filter out important information.

We compress on things like narrative identity, which for social scientists listening, it's like concept of homophily, like our tendency to listen to and trust people who think and act like us.

And then we could also maintain continuous partial attention, never really integrate things or move toward action.

Or we sort of LARP.

So like live action role play our way through the environment, relying on social scripts.

So these are problems for teams because none of this is good if you want to actually try to move toward productive work.

And this is especially a huge set of challenges for teams that are emergent because we can't rely on mutual norms.

They're not established yet.

This is probably our first time working together.

And we also can't rely on the stick, right?

Like emergent teams rarely have a parent organization making performance demands with paycheck as leverage.

Complexity weekend is going to kick you out if you fail to produce work.

You usually don't have the grant yet.

You don't have funding yet.

So there's no contractual reliability or relationship within the team.

And I don't know if Scott David is watching, but I'm sure he's going to start posting in the live chat if

After talking about contractual reliability.

He's a facilitator, he's great.

And then further, it's especially a problem for teams which are interdisciplinary and addressing complexity.

Because on one side, you have the complexity of the problem, interconnectedness, confounding variables, and predictability.

But on another, you have the source literature addressing it, which is also coming from a variety of domains.

just learning curves for application and figuring out goodness of fit.

I find this all the time.

I don't know anything about statistical mechanics, but it's going to be tremendously important in so many different places.

And then again, further, you have the structural complexity of the team itself.

So capabilities, knowledge, interests, boundaries, all this, especially as you increase beyond a dyad to four or more people.

So after spending the last two years or so

being continuously involved in one or more emergent teams and seeing them form, norm, perform, and stay together over time, as well as seeing them not norm and perform and seeing many disintegrate, there are blood and bones on the path.

It's sort of perilous.

So being on emergent teams though, obviously,

can be a hugely rewarding experience.

And some of the teams I've been on that formed a Complexity Weekend, one that I was on with you, you know, completely changed my life, career trajectory, given me tons of opportunities because of this interconnectedness between the individuals, the relationships they have with different organizations.

But I think like key piece of advice is do not rely on luck or enthusiasm.

This is just saying in the user experience and design communities, like don't rely on creativity.

So,

Even a short amount of time, I figured there's a few things we can go through that make sure your team is always on the move toward moving toward producing meaningful work.

So first, and this

I know you know that I never shut up about is goal setting gets getting super clear about your mission.

What is it your team is actually trying to accomplish?

Mission should be clear and really easy to communicate both within the team and to outsiders.

And it should be measurable or if it's a sort of binary, if you succeeded, there should be no question.

It should be really obvious that the mission was completed.

And this is honestly the biggest thing.

If you have a clear mission, you've won half the battle.

So many teams and organizations in general run into this problem of all scales, shifting goalposts, mission creep.

So then second is scoping the work.

So getting super clear about the approach to that mission, who's doing what, what's expected of team members, milestones.

I used to think this was work about work or bureaucratic.

And then looking back at the time that I felt that versus the time that I accepted it as something you need to do, the amount of work produced is just incomparable.

It's just not work about work.

It is like the work that's necessary for work to continue.

Every high reliability organization in the world does this for a reason.

You know, always scoping the work, always setting out a clear mission.

Then flexibility.

So changing your mission, your approach, like,

These actually can be good things.

So I like to think of it this way.

There's a person I spoke to from Department of Defense last week, and they said, be disciplined, not rigid.

I really like that.

It's just a matter of documenting your changes.

If you're going to change, that's good, but make sure you change it so that you're not only accountable to the new mission and the new approach and work, but also so that you're accountable to the change.

Then facilitation, our meme, get someone to facilitate the team, not manage it.

It's super important because you're an emergent team.

Nobody's technically in charge.

Nobody's the principal owner of the work, but that doesn't mean it can just be leaderless.

You do need somebody to manage the work in the sense of managing the resources, not managing the people, and facilitating people toward meaningful action.

There are a couple of tools that can be used to do this, one of which we created.

So I always highly recommend the Facilitators Catechism.

I can't share the link right now, but if you were to keep listening, if you search Google for Facilitators Catechism Playbook, you'll find our recent short book on using simple to implement project documentation.

And there are others, but I think those are important items to keep in mind.

And then I guess like a few other things that

are more tips and things to keep in mind, not necessarily process that you do, that I felt like would be helpful to note.

So one is that high performance teams have a good ratio between inquiry and advocacy, which is to say that teams which disagree on everything rarely perform, but teams that agree on everything immediately also rarely perform, which I thought was interesting.

The higher the impact of individual inputs on final group decisions,

the higher the related performance of the team.

I'm not sure, I would love to talk to you about that afterward, like why that is, because there's some reasons that come to mind, but I'm not sure about it.

But then the higher the degree of, and I thought this was super important, especially for Complexity Weekend, is the higher the degree of input of resources on subject matter from individual knowledge at the start of the project, the higher the quality of group performance later on.

So many people wait to push information from their fields or conflict avoidance.

So it's apparently, and this is from a meta-analysis I can link later, but apparently the earlier the better.

So don't be afraid of throwing too many resources, everybody's not going to read all of it.

But putting it out there, you don't have low expectations.

Some people will go through and read all the material you put out.

Um, then, uh, and this wouldn't be an RJ talk, unless I talk about either wolves or a Republic of Ragusa.

Uh, so today you get wolves.

Uh, there are a few studies that show that wolves actually out-competed trained domestic dogs on cooperative tasks.

And the reason was that domesticated dogs were being too domestic.

They were too conflict avoidant to work out role conflict early into the tasks.

So like sparring isn't fighting is the phrasing you had brought up to me recently.

It's like there's an importance in allowing for some conflict and disagreement because escalating a little now can mean no conflict escalation later.

And finally, I think is equal voice doesn't necessarily mean higher performance.

Some people, everybody has different personalities.

So if someone hasn't talked in a bit, that's okay.

But this is why you should have a facilitator present in these teams, because they need to be able to recognize that somebody hasn't been in the conversation for a long time.

You know, sometimes people want to gestate and really think about what's being brought in front of them.

They don't have a comment on everything yet.

So you do need a facilitator.

You do need that awareness to try to bring people back into the conversation.

They haven't been involved in a while.

Then last two things is, I guess, so you and I both compressed a bunch of a lot of the research we did on remote teams this last year into a series of actionable tips, specifically oriented toward teams using docs like Facilitator's Catechism.

I can't link, but for people listening, if you were to search for collaborative writing for catechism-based teams, you'd find our C3PO publication on Zenodo, which takes all that.

It's clear tips.

and actionables.

I tried my best to get the important stuff in like five to 10 minutes.

But at my interactive session at the next complexity weekend, I'm going to do a session called effect based operations for in complex systems.

So I'll go much deeper into a lot of this stuff and specifically on how teams share information and choose approaches and missions.

But yeah, I tried my best to squeeze five to ten minutes.


SPEAKER_00:
Wow.

Extremely informative, RJ, as always.

And I did link the two papers in the live chat.

I think here would be the two pieces I take away.

You know, it's like a spinning object.

Every time I hear the way you've distilled and compressed it, I think it's a little different.

But...

The first thing is that expertise in a domain or in complexity, it's not a tweak or a polish or addressing.

It's about incorporating it early into which direction the group sets off on.

That's not a later decision that the expert comes in to repair.

It's actually something like the statistician

is the joke is that they can look at the postmortem and see where it went wrong, but we should include the statistician early in designing.

And then that has analogy to including other perspectives.

And then the second piece that really stuck with me was,

You said when that there was increased structural complexity of the operating environment, basically people either withdraw or they fall back to simple decision-making heuristics.

And then you talked about how, okay, when there's higher structural complexity, there's a failure to integrate ideas.

There's a failure to include people's perspective that are different.

And then there's basically overall a failure to establish emergent teams and therefore

a mission failure or a functional failure.

And so it's like we are operating in a structurally complex environment in Complexity Weekend, and that's sort of actually the fun.

So how do we take elements that might be seen in one mindset as structural complexity, like time zones, interdisciplinary, challenging problems, wicked problems?

How do we take those elements that might be considered classical structural complexity and then make that part of our operating environment?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, it's almost like you don't want to sail against the wind.

So I think a good example you brought up before about clickishness, not necessarily in Complexity Weekend, but maybe in the structure of a team.

It's like, well, the system is going, because it's a complex system, it's going to tend toward that.

That will happen.

That's part of being, you know, in a large social group.

You're going to start to see clicks develop.

So it's like I feel like what Complexity Weekend did was they embraced part of that, which was the channels.

It's like let people channel into smaller groups, but don't trap them there.

So you're kind of allowing that socio-technical system to enjoy its tendency.

It will do that, but in a way that's productive.

So like I say, like even for, you know, for teams themselves, it's like,

embrace that clickishness.

If you start to see a development of click, it's like maybe it's the engineers of the team.

I found this in every working group I've ever been on.

The engineers start to, because they have a center of gravity, which is plausibility and implementation, which is great.

That's important.

Some people are going to be more focused on the theory.

It's not about one side winning over the other, or like you said, the expert coming in later to repair things.

you know, let them form sub teams and then try to figure out the channels between them.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Nice.

Thank you, RJ, for this awesome visit.

And I think it will be great to see your session in action in the coming weeks and months.

At this point, we're going to go to the Jamboard.

so if you want to thanks for having me on see you later rj thank you so we're going to go to the jamboard and we're going to have another facilitator join us so i'll give a few seconds for everybody to open up this jamboard link we'll link it also right now into the youtube chat but definitely go into this link and then we are going to have uh an interactive session in jamboard so if uh this is someone's first time in jamboard while i

adjust stuff it's a collaborative sort of post-it note application and sorry i'm just gonna have to change a little bit of the cropping good hello sasha hi do you want to um say hello and introduce yourself while i'm getting the jamboard ready and people are opening it


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, sounds good.

Yeah, so my name is Sasha, or also I go by Alexandra, and I will be a facilitator for this weekend, Heartbeat, as well as Complexity Weekend in May.

And yeah, I'm excited to join and kind of play around in the Jamboard today as we talk through some of the themes, yeah, and I guess norms of Complexity Weekend.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

Well, thanks for joining.

So on the Jamboard, let's go to the second slide, which is, and you click on the top with whether it will say two of however many, and just use the right arrow or the left arrow.

And then on the left bar is showing here, you can click sticky note, and then that is how you can write something on there.

So we'll just find a good spot for us to put the video.

And Sasha, what is your intention today?


SPEAKER_03:
Um, yeah, my intention today is to meet some new people and, um, to see what brought them here because, um, I'm always pleasantly surprised at the new participants we get at each heartbeat.

Uh, and yeah, I just, I think that is really exciting because, um, something or someone brought them to this community, uh, and it wasn't necessarily a big complexity weekend kind of event.

So.

And I'm excited to attend the facilitator sessions because the rest of the facilitators are so interesting in their own right.

And yeah, I'm just happy to learn from them.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And it's true, like the heartbeat has a very low entry as designed.

And so it's easy for people with a variety of intentions, including just being curious.

And that's totally good for the

heartbeat event here.

Now there's a little bit of a lag with live stream, which is why we always ask the people who are on the stream first, but it's only, you know, they should call it a 30 second delay stream, but look at this awesome answer.

So learn about complexity, understand different perspectives, meet new people, share exciting ideas.

And then these are things where we kind of read what other people have to say.

and it resonates with us and it's like, oh yeah, wait, there's other people who are looking to make new connections as well, then that's gonna make it twice as easy because I know that there are other people who are thinking along similar lines.

Let's go get feedback on ideas, awesome.

Yes, community of practice means that we support each other and we give each other good feedback and like any other good cybernetic system.

Let's actually dwell for a little bit on the third slide, which is who are you and how did you discover complexity?

So this is sort of a who are you now moment.

It can be reflective, but I think what's so fun is to hear about how many different directions people come at complexity from.

So Sasha, maybe what,

brought you to complexity or even just since you may have answered that in the abstract just how is it being rediscovered in what you're working on now um yeah i mean i i think i'm every um heartbeat that we have i'm always rethinking complexity and um


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

Like even how to visualize it.

I'm just looking at this like ball of yarn thread, the image in the center and, um, yeah, it's just, it's really fun because then we get to hear about like the applications of complexity.

Like every time RJ talks, I just think like, yeah, duh, that's complexity.

Um, but that's not how I learned about it or how I would have thought about it on my own, um, is to think about, um,

kind of the applications and the tools that teams need to channel complexity into projects.

And so, yeah, I'm thinking more about it from that perspective about the teams that I'm part of and how to, yeah, channel people's, you know,

contributions and unique personalities into a tangible outcome.

But yeah, how I think about complexity in my everyday life is how to better understand brain development and the different temporal and spatial scales that influence that process.

That was a lot.


SPEAKER_00:
but we look for it and we find it when we look for it.

And I agree like the way that for RJ to say, well, I'm not gonna talk about complexity today.

I'm gonna talk about how transdisciplinary teams form.

That was sort of the shadow of complexity.

because it was framed as an idea synthesis as, well, you have systems theory and you have cybernetics and you have this theory and this theory, and you're integrating this theory.

And so it was unifying, but then it wasn't giving a bridge to actually making it happen in teams.

So it just is interesting how by thinking about complexity, it's like you peel away from the ideas, but really you're deploying the ideas.

So here we find it when we look for it, learning about its applications in Teams, definitely.

And a lot of people, for example, from different like Agile or just systems and organizing, consulting, management,

lot of these areas have thought about the complexities of the human systems so then you have physicists working on materials and complexity but then it was sort of like a fight to recognize the non-linear characteristics of materials versus the linear characteristics of materials for example but then in the social scenarios it was it was so obvious that you would have non-linearity or emergence and so there is something to be said for

course integrating across areas so that we can combine some of the rigor and the technical tools with what people see just like this person wrote in blue emergence in every system otherwise it wouldn't be at the scale we observe it at yeah right on cool um let's go to four so four what is something that you are curious or wondering about


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, today I'm curious about learning what the other participants think about complexity and I guess finding out how they work best in teams and what kind of tools people bring from other systems and

backgrounds and trainings to better work in teams because i think that uh yeah like you just said like agile and scrum and these other um more like business oriented methods of teamwork uh are really quite removed um from my experience in education and academics and so um getting to know the other tools and even um names that people have uh

for improving teamwork.

I think it's always exciting.


SPEAKER_00:
Good point, I agree.

There's a totally different school of thought and of practice for managing teams, often working on the same topic.

Somebody could be doing a research project or data analysis in industry or in academia or outside of academia, and it would have a very different look.

And that's not to say that they should all converge on the same way of doing things, but there are probably lessons to be learned

Here's somebody has plus one on how can we learn about complexity concepts at a very early age?

How can we learn to approach problem solving in complex domains?

How does ad tech, maybe that's advertising technology, affect online social network dynamics?

Wow, that's a great question.

How can we bring complexity perspective to a broader audience, everyone?

how to connect different elements.

So these two, it's almost like these are about communicating and what do other participants think about it?

And this is about what our group can do in the coming hours.

And then we have, this is nice cluster of just differences in expectations around complexity.


SPEAKER_03:
I guess I kind of chuckling at this one that says how to connect different elements and people who do not have a complexity mindset.

And, you know, perhaps this is being kind of generous, but maybe everyone does have the mindset.

And I think you have to be explicitly anti complexity or whatever is the opposite to kind of reject it.

So


SPEAKER_00:
um yeah i i would love to know what the opposite of complexity looks like in this case or in this application just as a you know a proof of concept and this i made this one big because i i love this question where might i work to make my interesting complexity help make the world better that's

perpetual question i think that could be somebody again who has read one article or listened to one video and they think wait how could i make the world better just by being curious about complexity and i hope this is also a question that complexity experts could ask themselves because it's uh this fractal of what it means just to be interested and to learn by doing with complexity so this is a great

question and i think what's cool is that's what in a way we all want to know that's what the guidelines and the values are about this is something that's really nicely phrased as a question let's go to five which is what is a cool complexity concept and how would you like to teach it

So we kind of have two sides here.

One side is what's an idea that you're excited about to share or to help other people make the connections on?

And then what's something that we're still really curious about?

So would you like to go on one side of the other, Sasha, or I can do it?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

So a cool complexity concept, I think,

Yeah, one metaphor or concept that I really like is fractals and seeing repeating patterns at different scales.

And so I think a beautiful demonstration of it is, of course, art.

And I can see a lot of that behind you, Daniel.

Yeah, so I think that's a...

a nice visualization of a complexity concept, but then leads to things like building stronger teams that has fractal relationship patterns repeating at multiple scales, like how people communicate within a team and how teams communicate to each other.

There's these magnifying effects of things that are

don't work well on a smaller scale might look even worse on a bigger scale.


SPEAKER_00:
make sense, cool.

So let's look, we have some things that are technical skills or things that you mentioned and things that you'll do in your session, like art.

And then things that are almost where we want to share what we're excited about, but what we're excited about is actually what we're curious to learn and learn by doing.

Like how do we make teams that are effective at dealing with complexity?

And then there's all kinds of

areas that are driving our community members, that they're driven to learn, where when you ask them, what is something that you want to learn?

It's like, oh, I want to learn systemic risk or complexity in economic systems, transformation in organizations, building better databases.

So how do we, then here, let's see, how to select which information is relevant in a system and what variables are not relevant for a specific outcome.


SPEAKER_04:
That's the big question.


SPEAKER_00:
That could go on either side.

It's just all about whichever side someone's on.

Cool.

Resiliency and environment, building better organizational structures.

Again, I would say these are things creating complex properties by uniting with complex systems like horses and water.

Wow.

On the expert side.

And I think I know who that could be.

These are awesome.

Let's go to six.

So this is kind of a fun slide.

How can complexity have impact in real world systems?

This could be asking how have you successfully applied complexity or how have you seen it work in practice?

So where can we apply complexity?

And how can we look at the outcomes and know where complexity has had impact?

So let's people will be putting their things in the coming seconds.

But what would you say to this, Sasha, or what does this make you think about?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I guess I'm thinking back to last complexity weekend in May, so almost a year ago, and part of the team that I was on that I think really embodied complexity was

including stakeholders and having, like you and RJ were talking earlier, having multiple different perspectives from the start.

And of course, that makes it quite challenging to converge on one idea or one product.

But it's extremely important because it's shaping the understanding of the problem and the

know breadth of solutions that could occur so that's what i think about um as including complexity um and different perspectives in your team from the very start nice so here here's just starting to make a few clusters from what we're seeing and people can keep on adding more there's you


SPEAKER_00:
using complexity as a idea or an intuition pump so that's kind of hypothesizing generative mechanisms of complex networks so we know that this phone network isn't exactly like an ant interaction network it's not exactly like in market economy or school of fish but just by being open sometimes we ask ourselves really relevant questions like what is the media that the network is interacting in or something like that

And really related to which ideas are generated is sharing perspectives from the start of the project.

And at the broad level, are we gonna be thinking about this as a public health issue or a molecular question or a legal issue?

Well, it's an engineering issue, depending on who is in the room and what perspectives are included when the temperature is high.

And then as things anneal and slow down and start getting towards implementation,

If it does go towards implementation, then you've locked in a lot of that early phase.

So this is that early part.

And then people have seen complexity have impact on identifying laws that apply across different fields.

better complexity thinking in the general public, understanding the limitations and inherent uncertainty in models.

So this is something I've seen many times and it's really difficult to even estimate the impact, but there's rooms where perhaps somebody puts up a linear regression and that's the end of the story.

I mean, the line is going up and the p-value is below 0.05, so isn't the discussion on policy over?

And it's not over.

It's just the beginning of thinking about nonlinear dynamical systems and then thinking about multiple perspectives on what the regression means or even what the right leverage point is.

So having people in the conversation who understand fundamental uncertainties in models, like, oh, well, if the random seed on your computer were different, then that simulation would have come out a little differently.

So surely we can't just use one simulation to make policy.

these are the kinds of questions that really matter when people ask them because they're grounded not in a feeling of uh qualitative complexity which is also extremely powerful um like related to this good or bad impact and getting beyond all or nothing thinking that's where the qualitative complexity and the quantitative complexity actually come together so that's really cool nice lots of ideas here any other thoughts here um


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I'm really liking all the other feedback that we're getting from the other participants using Jamboard.

So that's really awesome.

I like this one, helps get projects beyond all or nothing thinking and beyond setting everything as goals or externalities.

Yeah, I think that's a really big part of Complexity Weekend and forming the teams and transforming the teams because

Yeah, as much as we wanna focus on kind of like the formation of the teams and the start of the project and the idea, I think what I've learned from my experience with Complexity Weekend is that

people will leave teams and new people will join and that is just part of this natural process and to work with people in a respectful way is a really big skill because of course it's frustrating when things don't work out in this all-or-nothing paradigm and yeah just to have faith that

Yeah, people will bring their best selves to a project, or they won't, and that's okay, and then they can leave the project.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

Nice.

And this last one, I'll just note this.

Complexity is ubiquitous and doesn't exist in, quote, reality.

It is an analytical framing that permits us to move forward.

So that's a very action-oriented, pragmatic...

perspective on complexity as an approach.

So I resonate a lot with this because it's not about which systems are complex or not, or it's about a North star that we can all pursue.

Let's go to seven.

So we have about 10 minutes left on this live stream.

So just in seven, maybe we can think for a few minutes about how the heartbeat is kind of this entry point, right?

We're all in the atrium and gather.

What are the kinds of participant behaviors and norms that can help us make Complexity Weekend an amazing space?

So there's things that we want to see and things that we want to avoid, and people can just put up whichever side of the

Jamboard Slide, and it could be their first time here, but they're actually bringing, of course, so much experience that they have.

So what are things that you've seen work in other spaces or not work in other spaces?

I'll type one, Sasha, whatever you say.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I'm just thinking back to what people are curious and excited about doing today and how these behaviors are going to encourage that.

But people want to meet new participants, new facilitators, and they want to learn about other complexity concepts.

And so the behaviors that are going to facilitate that is

being open to meeting new people and actually having conversations with them.

And so in Gather, that just means saying hello to whoever you bump into.

And I really want to encourage that behavior.

And that's what I would like to see.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Sounds good.

Things you want to avoid.

Yep.

Just say hi to others.

I wonder who put that one there.

respecting different levels and also different types of knowledge.

And one example of this sort of expert coming in early and setting the stage, that's one truth.

And then yes, and what's also true is the beginner's question early on can set the direction of the group by asking, hey, I wonder if it could be possible to do this this way.

And so it's actually not just expertise is magic and the earlier you apply it, the better.

It's actually earlier is different.

And so the changes that are made by the group early matter.

And so that's related to chaos and the Lyapunov exponent and how rapidly systems that are very, very similar diverge, how rugged is the landscape or how nonlinear is its trajectory.

And so what does it say about online teams, online communities that whether it's expertise or beginner at the beginning of the team, it matters.

It says that it's a complex system and that's what opens up this whole toolkit and this whole way of thinking about online teams because Sasha, you said who's anti-complexity.

Well, who's anti-complexity on an online team?

I don't know.

It's hard to look at those empirical patterns and say that it could be something else.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I'm seeing some interesting things here.

I've never seen the word conclusionism.


SPEAKER_00:
What does that mean to you?


SPEAKER_03:
I assume it means like jumping to conclusions.

Please correct me if I'm wrong.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

It could be, or just even taking it even beyond jumping to conclusions, just we're writing this infinite game.

So we're going to have little pauses and times to integrate, but there's no conclusion on complexity.

there's discussion and there's more data and there's future directions but there's not exactly a conclusive end and now the paper is over the complexity book is over every complexity book kind of ends by looking out to where things could be going so this is nice um talking across each other not listening understanding and here

we're online so let's just think about the technical the intercultural just lag differences in background differences in people's computer setups so let's just take an extra breath and and give people the benefit of the doubt and then also help everyone speak and be heard so that's really cool all right we have about you know five or eight minutes left let's

um okay i think we can go to slide eight and we'll look at just slide eight for i guess most of the rest of the time and nine so community support on slide eight so here it's sort of two sides it's almost building on that what can you teach or share and then what are you looking to learn or what are you curious about here are people can

put their Keybase username or just put their first name, come find me and gather if there's something that publicly they would want to be known that they can provide or that they're looking for.

And also that's eight where we'll hang out.

But the only other one that we can look for post-its is on nine, which is about team specifically.

So we'll hang out on eight since this is sort of a more general case.

But if someone's looking for a team or can offer an internship or something like that, that's where we can put it here for today.

And we really...

structure and support that team formation process with a focus in the cohort and in the weekend and that's why we have a cohort based experience but then the heartbeat again is like where people can get a taste of that introduction to it and also an entry point that's 100 the same into the community of practice but this is a little bit like a different doorway and it allows us to have smaller events and iterate

So what would be something that you, Sasha, or just what kind of stuff would be cool to see?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, well, actually, I was going to ask you a version of this question.

Having been on many online teams, what is a good way to

phrase or ask for the kind of help that you're looking for.

So yeah, how to approach people about certain asks, or especially in our online community where things are always iterating.

Is it better to leave with the technical question or the general, like, I want to learn more about ecology?

How should people phrase the ask?


SPEAKER_00:
Nice question.

And...

I guess it's going to be situational, but we can still talk about some principles, just like complexity.

I would say it's helpful if somebody doesn't know a certain feature, then they can ask and just raise the flag.

Just raise the yellow flag.

It doesn't need to be a failure sign.

Say, I'm actually, I'm curious about math, or I feel like I should want to learn more, but I don't even know.

So we can always just zoom in on our uncertainty.

And then with that as our sort of flag, we can raise that and a facilitator or a peer facilitator or mentor will come and support you wherever you are.

So that's something that's kind of an art and a science with identifying where you're uncertain and maybe also providing specific details if it's known about, for example, like is it an unpaid internship or is it a paid contract?

There might be somebody who is just not going to stop for one or the other.

And so if you are doing something that's a little bit more structured, like we're five people in a company and we're looking for one person who can do this because in the next two months, we're going to be doing that.

Then that can give a lot more structure than I'm curious about this as sort of an ambiguous lure.

So cool.

Diamantis helping out with coding and modeling, and Diamantis' session will be coming up just in a few minutes.

Scott David is looking for participants in complexity-based forensic project.

So interesting things here people can keep on adding.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I guess one thing I wanted to add, yeah, asking for mentorship or really broad things like that,

or learning about a certain topic that, yeah, it can be too much or too little to ask of someone.

And so to be specific about the time scale on which you would want that to happen, because having a bit more organization from the

asker from the person reaching out, I think can be quite helpful, like you said, because then people will stop or not stop at that ask.

And so figuring out if it's going to be like a one-time meeting or something that's going to be more long-term, like you want to meet once a week to talk about this subject, while that might feel like a bigger ask, it can actually be better because it's more concrete.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, makes sense.

So these...

Post-it notes on the Jamboard are gonna be accessible to people who are invited to our heartbeat and in our community.

So this is partially how we also help include those who are finding that this live stream is not at a convenient moment.

They can look at other people's Post-its and they can add their own.

So I would really encourage people, whenever they're listening to this, to return back to the community support and just check in.

because it's awesome when you can help a complexity seeker and a community member.

So there's so much that will be added here.

Again, we're kind of a little bit behind reality, so to speak, with the live stream, but there's going to be so much that's going to be coming in here.

in the last just two minutes of the live stream.

So thanks everyone, by the way, for the awesome Jamboard.

This is like really fun and it always is a new chance to hear first time and recurrent people's views.

So here are a couple of tips from Monica Kang on online collaboration and she's a facilitator

extraordinaire dare i say and we'll be returning for the may 2021 cohort so she's on the website if you want to learn more about monica but she helps us always think about these kinds of things active listening be curious and open assuming kindness playing by our strength and over communicating so really nice and i guess with all that being said head over to gather

We'll meet you there in basically five minutes at 10, 15 a.m.

Pacific.

And Sasha, anything else you wanted to add?


SPEAKER_03:
No, it was great to walk through this on Jamboard.

And yeah, I learned something new every time.

And I hope that our participants do as well.


SPEAKER_00:
All right, well, we will see you all in Gather in about five minutes.

Thanks again, everyone, for participating in the Jamboard.

And for those of you who are watching it after the fact, we hope you can still participate in whenever our next event is.

So, peace.

Bye.