SPEAKER_00:
Hello everyone, welcome to the October 2022 Complexity Weekend Heartbeat.

I'll quickly update the screen.

Getting things started is always fun, and it's hard to believe that it's only been one month since the September 2022 Weekend Closing Ceremony.

So, we're in the October 2022 Heartbeat now.

We're going to have 15 minutes of Michael Garfield music, Future Fossils, and then we will have an interactive Jamboard session, have some great fun talking about different aspects of Complexity Weekend and preparing for the rest of the heartbeat, which will be all interactive in the Gather space.

So enjoy the next 15 minutes of Michael Garfield.

Tell all your friends they can join the live stream and see you soon.


SPEAKER_01:
Woo-hoo!


UNKNOWN:
so so

Thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
All right, welcome everyone.

It is the October 2022 heartbeat at Complexity Weekend.

It's October 29th, at least where I am.

And this is gonna be our opening live stream.

We'll have some informational slides for those who are joining for the first time or rejoining Complexity Weekend activities.

and everything is happening in the Jamboard.

The Jamboard can be interacted with using this left panel of options.

So you can draw, you can erase things, you can click around, add post-it notes, add images and shapes, and so on.

So the first part

of this live stream is going to be informative on Complexity Weekend.

And it'll be continuous with some fun interactive discussions, and also surfacing some of the proceedings from the September 2022 weekend, but more on that soon.

So let's just start with what Complexity Weekend is about and what we're all here for.

Our collective mission

is to learn complexity science by doing, to serve through deep time, and we include to innovate.

Diversity is key.

Participation is core to transdisciplinary practices.

And in terms of what brings us all together.

shared purpose and interest in complexity science a desire to have impact on co-creative teams and improve our community of practice through feedback participation and peer mentorship as well as our core values and desire to develop a community so to look at some more of that core values

Here is in our coda, which in time I'll put the link in the live chat where you may already have it.

And this coda reflects the outputs of some collective work

that we have done over 2022 on the mission purpose values and governance of complexity weekend and so here you can see those key three aspects of the mission and aspects of our purpose as well as a lot of other awesome details

And under values, I'll just read the first cell on the left for each of these values.

And you can see more details as well as get involved and elaborate, complexify, implement.

So as to the values, complexity weekend is itself a complex system.

Education is active.

Learn complexity science by doing.

Teamwork makes the dream work.

Participation means accessibility and inclusion for all.

Respect is key.

No side doors.

Get out of the building.

Stakeholder input is key.

We draw inspiration from the values of other communities and reach out on the edges and stay involved.

So back to the Jamboard.

That's a little bit about what Complexity Weekend is from a mission and vision and values perspective.

How about from a more structural and procedural or operational perspective?

Well, our community consists of events and different people, the roles that they play in and around these events, and of course all those other spaces in between.

The broadest circle of our community are the participants, as we're all participants in the community.

Then, different people may also engage in general or event-specific roles.

Some roles include event co-organizing, those who help coordinate and prepare for the different events, event facilitators, those who facilitate live interactive sessions during events, associates and supporters,

those who provide non-financial or financial support for making Complexity Weekend sustainable.

and several other aspects of note of this image.

Two key ways that people join the excitement of Complexity Weekend is through the monthly heartbeats and through the biannual weekend cohorts.

And so there are two Complexity Weekend cohorts per year.

And in the months that aren't featuring the weekend itself, in the other 10 months, we have the monthly heartbeats.

So that's where we're at right now.

And lastly, there's a few different kinds of teams.

Teams are forming inside, outside, and on the interfaces with Complexity Weekend.

And broadly, there are two kinds of teams.

The first kind of team are the committees.

Committees are learning and applying complexity, and their focus is on different aspects of Complexity Weekend itself.

We'll talk more about that soon.

And the other type of team are the teams that participants lead and take them in just so many different directions.

Those teams can be

ranging from a book club or just an open space for recurrent discussion and development, all the way on through deliverable-oriented or business research, different areas of application and learning for complexity.

That's community structure from a role-based view, and we can also look at how those dynamics play out through deep time.

here on the horizontal are the train tracks of time heading off into deep time and on the y-axis going up and down is something like the relative energy of the community the big peaks are twice per year

leading up to and culminating in the weekend itself which is just a time of continuous activity and a lot of people setting aside the space and time to participate fully whatever that means for them in that weekend and it's just always an amazing place where we have such a global cohort

and so many facilitators and participants who just join in, and whether it's their first time or not, they always bring something special.

And...

As stated earlier, in the months in between, the weekends themselves are the heartbeats.

And these are smaller, chill events where people are trying out facilitation, exploring new types of sessions, and there's just a lot of structured and unstructured time happening.

for sharing ideas, connecting with other participants, and giving a really easy on-ramp for those who want to be getting more involved.

The time zones for the activities in the weekend are continuous so that everyone is equally available, at least in principle.

And for the heartbeats, the times represent two different intervals that are

rotating throughout the year so sometimes it works sometimes it doesn't work it's all good we show up when we can here we see april 2022 weekend and the more recent september 23rd to 25th weekend just one month ago and we're here in the first

heartbeat after that september weekend again it feels like so much has happened and then the backdrop of that community energy is your own complexity journey and you and your teams so maybe that's something we can explore in this jamboard

Just wanted to point to the committees and a few ways to get involved in Complexity Weekend and a few updates, which we'll have a lot more to share about soon, but just wanted to give some preliminary updates and then we'll jump into some interactive slides that'll be really fun, review some aspects of the previous weekend and look forward.

So several ongoing areas of development within Complexity Weekend committees.

So these are committees that everyone is welcome to join and if

Facilitating your own team doesn't seem like the right opportunity that you want to take right now, but you're keen to join a team where you can learn and apply complexity.

That's exactly what the committees are there for.

There, with other people and a project that's stewarded by Complexity Weekend, you'll be able to find a really important contribution area.

So in the tech committee, there's been a lot of amazing developments in 2022.

So truly, thanks for ManaFall and all the others who have participated in .tech.

And just to show one .tech improvement that we've made over this year,

we added a login for complexityweekend.com, which might seem obvious to some, but we did not have it and now we do.

And so if one goes to the account settings, once they're logged in on the top right, they'll find a user portal.

And now the top question in the user portal is a dropdown with how you want to be reminded about the opt-in monthly heartbeats.

So now with one click,

you can just be kept in the loop about ongoing heartbeat events, be added to calendar events and or get email reminders.

And so this has simplified the heartbeat registration greatly.

And we're just sort of working through it for the first time in this October heartbeat, but it's an example of the kind of development

and also an example of our movement towards the goal of the Complexity Weekend website, which is that this...

will be the one URL, the one location in cyberspace to participate fully in Complexity Weekend.

So all video information, messaging, everything that you want to do regarding participation in Complexity Weekend will be in this one website eventually.

It's going to take a lot of financial and attentional support, and it's going to be a journey and an open-ended one at that.

But it's a really important direction because we totally recognize and understand some of the challenges of existing on other platforms and platform and attention, fragmentation, and so on.

So let everyone know that they can make an account at complexityweekend.com and just quickly opt in with one click to Heartbeats.

Placemaking has been thinking about what the place that we're in is from a lot of different perspectives, and we'll explore that in the Jamboard a little bit today.

And .teams here is the committee that stewards the team process at Complexity Weekend.

That's the before, during, and after of team formation.

And

Anyone who wants to be involved, just email us or get in contact or write a little note right now in the Jamboard and we can get you in the loop.

And just to show you the second set of committees and activities that they're involved in, then we'll head into the next slides on the Jamboard.

DotLegal.

DotLegal has been active with several participants and exploring directions for some of the formal structures of Complexity Weekend, especially how to include the participatory and community-based aspects in decision-making.

So if that sounds interesting to you, whether you have expertise or just curiosity and desire to learn, any of these areas are open for people who want to join.

And lastly, for now, the Dot Outreach Committee.

The Dot Outreach Committee has been doing several projects

Some focus more on just regular communication and ensuring that other people who are not in the community are aware of the kinds of events that they can participate in and things they can do, and also doing some really awesome work with reimagining and rebranding different aspects of Complexity Weekend, some of which we will see now.

So let's move over on the top

drop down the drawer and head over to slide two.

So this is just to show and highlight one really

great collage or mosaic that was collaborated on during the September 2022 weekend, so just a few weeks ago, in some facilitated sessions by Michaela and others.

And it's just an example of how Jamboard can be used to integrate

quietly and with a sort of emergent coherence a lot of different perspectives just want to highlight a few aspects of this slide and then we're going to walk through some more open space where it's been prepared to explore today so this slide asked

if complexity weekend were a city village town what services would you like to find there so if you're watching feel free to add in anything or just like add a plus one or copy a plus one

but I'll just highlight a few different areas again before we head to slide three and we'll start to explore some more open space.

But first, just to get some ideas primed and just see some things that participants who may or may not be

with us concurrently now and uphold their voice and make sure that we can continue to make contact with the deep past and shallow just as we want to do for the future.

So starting on the left side and just reading a few random aspects.

conference hall jobs fair marketplace farmer's market animals daytime nighttime deep profiles over time for who is there personal space hashtags meeting places places to eat together speed dating for ideas announcements for live sessions

no loose or ghost ideas or resources always tied back to a person yoga studio wellness spa reconnecting walks in nature gym forest bathing move your body library bios deep profiles hall of fame shared histories

librarian archivist to consult quiet place to enjoy references unwind with different drinks systems change center thanks for adding more notes education school university guild food for thought humanity cafe lounge and restaurant festive places

nature you can interact with.

And just one thought on this busy city-like slide before we move forward is it was really amazing to see all of these ideas and the way that they blend so importantly together and also the way that they

perhaps one could say, dances with systems and complexity.

It's not only a research area, it's not only a learning area.

There's ways to live with complexity and some of those are alluded to here.

let's move to the third slide and to give a preview of just the upcoming few slides if you're not in the jamboard just check the youtube live chat and it's the top message that complexity weekend sent so yana thanks a lot for bringing a lot of uh structure and creativity to this process and helping prepare this jamboard today and for all the co-organizing and

yana has prepared for us some open spaces so let's just look at what those spaces are going to be from slides three through six and then we'll walk through them as we see fit essence core value and responsibility one word that says what our community stands for

Four, word map, characteristics and boundaries, features, values, and attributes of our community, as well as our boundaries and what we are not.

Narrative, voice, messaging, stories, a brief expression of our community in words and prose style, our tagline slash catchphrase, stories and adventures about experiences, and experience, multimodal look and feel, texture, space.

visible and audible expressions of our community, our colors and fonts, textures and elements that help us navigate through within and beyond our community.

Awesome.

So let's jump back to three and return to essence, core, value, and responsibility.

What is one word that says what our community stands for?

So people may write in the YouTube chat and I'll copy it over, or again, may join the Jamboard and just add directly.

I'll read a comment in the live chat while anyone who wants to add something can do so.

Adapt wrote, I think it would be cool if there was a collaboration or innovation center focused on system change or sustainability.

Cool.

I'll just write down some of these words again, while others are moving to slide three and can be adding things as well.

Collaboration.

innovation center systems change sustainability great words um again while anyone is moving over to slide three um

few thoughts come to mind also i know that the live stream is slightly happening in different times at different places two thoughts perhaps related to essence or i don't know if it's two

but at least the first part of it is that we connect through time with essence.

We can bring from the past and from other sources and in that distillation or sieving, filtering, permeability, migration, in those movements,

we can start to see what essence is as something that's being carried through time the essence of a thing is not just the entire thing in itself

so we do need those other kinds of verbs to come into play to see essence and then also i think the previous slide and this slide together juxtapose also speak to essence and about some different modes of engagement with complexity as well as complexity weekend and not saying this is the only distinction or categorization but just to provide one

Sometimes there's a lot on the table and there's like many objects to play with, many people to engage with.

And there's so much already there.

And then there's another mode where we have an open space and here we can see chaos, the sensitivity to initial conditions and the way that somebody stepping up and making a difference just by adding a post-it note can be so important and set the unfolding dynamics of how things move forward.

Thanks, Adapt.

I'm going to add some of these terms you've listed in the chat.

You added inclusive, learning, together, and friendly.

Awesome.

And of course, learning together.

Maybe if it's hyphenated, it'll count as one word.

And empowerment.

Open space.

Very cool.

So in that open space stewarding, one can rest with the silence and that's not bad.

And also one can add.

And when even one or more people start to add to their shared niche to modify what each other can see and experience and do,

we are really learning complexity by doing.

We're seeing patterns across systems.

We're making different connections, creating and discovering different resonances.

Some of the really fundamental aspects of complexity are not necessarily in that mosaic alone.

In those books with the pages and in the computer programs,

hashtag slide two.

But also complexity is in the unfolding when we start with something that is very open.

And that's not just how we learn and apply complexity for those with a little familiarity and a lot of familiarity, but it's also how we embody and enact complexity.

one might even say all of these words at least we hope learning together open space certainly so all

spend just a few more seconds looking at essence if anyone wants to add anything on three otherwise we'll head to four in just a few more seconds so let's just take in essence add anything more if we want and then we'll move to four

accessible.

Thanks for those who are adding different post-it notes here.

These are all really great.

And again, it's kind of like writing a collaborative essay together, but different.

Getting it all out there on the page, being inspired by what was written, starting again with the open space where it's accessible, inclusive, and an opportunity for innovation, collaboration, and systems change.

And that pre-becoming can embody sustainability and regenerativity.

Let's go to the fourth slide.

Fourth slide is word map characteristics and boundaries, features, values, and attributes of our community, as well as our boundaries and what we are not.

So while people are heading over to the fourth slide, there's one aspect that I potentially could have explored earlier, but just to show it now, this is the program for the October heartbeat.

We're currently in this first interval, watching on YouTube, participating in the Jamboard,

After this, all events are going to be in the Gather atrium.

We're going to start with a one-on-one session to connect with other participants.

We'll then transition into spotlight talks and discussion.

And in the last hour of this first interval, from 20 to 24 UTC on the 29th, we'll be collaborating and hanging out.

The second interval is from 12 to 16 UTC on Sunday the 30th.

It's going to begin with a session defining ecotones facilitated by Michaela Emsch and Vera Hoffman.

Will there be defining ecotones in a complex environment?

Then, 13 UTC, Jana will facilitate a session on the Community Model Canvas.

The final two hours of that second interval will be just like the first, spotlight talks, discussion, collaboration, hanging out, and I'll put that link on the slide four where we're at right now so you can check it out.

So again, welcome to those who are joining the live stream.

please feel free to navigate over to slide four with the top pull-down drawer.

And let's explore some features, values, and attributes of our community, as well as our boundaries and what we are not.

First, just adding those terms exactly as used so that we can perhaps cluster and also feel free to rearrange things and modify them however you see fit.

I'm just starting with what has been written in the open space.

And I know what people put in the betweens

will help shape the space.

With values, I'm just adding a link to the values Coda document that was displayed earlier.

So people can explore that more.

It's again, the slide two, three.

dialectic or juxtaposition.

How can we think about values?

There's so many different kinds of values, people's different conceptions too.

We can look at the mosaic, look at the

realistically dozens or however many hours of direct work and so much more of indirect and invisible work that leads to the development of this document.

And anything that starts to reflect that many contributions begins to get long.

If it's a video, it's going to be long.

If it's a document, it's going to be long.

And so that's that busy review and resonate mode, looking at so much that's already been added.

And then here we are in the open field, in the open space where there's space time to have inclusive learning together.

so on values well let's start with features well what are features they're aspects of our community connecting with other builders and innovators awesome and in values what is being added is respect collaboration

Someone has written, sorry, I could be on the Jamboard.

If you can join the Jamboard and you want to participate this way in the about 30 minutes that we have left here, great.

If you're on mobile or it just doesn't work out for you to use the Jamboard, you can write things in the live chat.

So thank you for adding that.

And thanks for watching live.

Respect, collaboration, learning, and learning.

The value that's so nice you have to write it twice.

Features.

I'll add a note from Scott David.

who's facilitated and participated over the years in CW.

And he often uses the BOLTS acronym, B-O-L-T-S.

And that stands for business, operational, legal, technical, and social aspects of a complex organizational system or a phenomena.

And there's many partitionings for different kinds of systems.

This is just one kind of heuristic.

It's like a handy wrench.

and it deals with bolts.

And especially when one considers how broad social can be, but it just, when I think about the features as an organizer, I often think about these kind of more operational aspects and everybody's going to have their own view on the features of Complexity Weekend.

Maybe some people are receiving participant emails and joining synchronous activities.

Maybe some people are or aren't receiving those emails and they're staying updated on another digital platform.

Like they're watching the videos on YouTube, but they haven't quite made the jump to joining a synchronous activity.

Maybe someone's in the synchronous activity and they didn't get the emails.

A friend brought them in.

So then what features of Complexity Weekend are presenting themselves to this person?

And so how can we steward and scaffold our mission when different features will be apparent and relevant for those who are approaching and interfacing with us differently?

So...

collective intelligence awesome yeah whoever wrote that please feel free to add more information like on what collective intelligence is or what you think it means about complexity that's a very interesting topic back to the values ethics respect of natural and social environments awesome

Yeah, of course, just giving offhand remarks.

So if anyone has more to add, just add it, however.

But when I see some of what you all have been adding, ethics, respect, and respect of natural and social environments, it kind of seems like a sequence.

Like ethics is a broad area,

respect is an ethic and then how do we operationalize respect how do we unpack that one more level respect of natural and social environments and then taking that even one more level i'll just leave a little blank post-it note there that's red

That's some particular system, some particular natural or social environment.

So rather than just say, well, we're going to make a generalization and stop at, we should respect natural social environments, a normative generalization at that, but then that's going to be taken to the last mile and like where the rubber hits the road is how we respect natural and social environments.

Like it's great to want to respect people,

then it's great to actually respect people in that last mile in the conversation and that's exactly what we hope happens in different complexity weekend events especially the one-on-one sessions where we connect on the edges

and we have an opportunity to have like an unstructured respect and community-based discussion and it always goes just to the most exciting and connective ways people take it however is authentic to them in that moment and so

it's shaped by many factors and that's very exciting and really special listening yes listening connected with respect of natural and social environments okay what we are not a school or non-profit a political organization correct we are none of those things

Though do note the dot legal discussion earlier with an ongoing not formalized now and not formalized ever process of balancing formal and informal realities.

So having nonprofit registration as an organization is

allows us to for example receive certain kinds of donation and support as well as to follow the best practices for supporting people's time as a unincorporated volunteer organization there are strengths and challenges and as different types of registration change there's also different strengths and challenges

Attributes.

Facilitation and co-facilitation.

Awesome.

Yeah, very great attribute.

Multi-age and gender.

Great, thank you for sharing all of these points.

Let's go to slide five.

So slide five.

Yeah, thanks everyone for joining on four.

Now we'll head to five.

So narrative, voice, messaging, stories.

A brief expression of our community in words and prose style.

our tagline slash catchphrase stories and adventures about experiences welcome august thank you for your message in the chat

Okay, as before, I'm just sort of capturing those key terms from the prompt that we were gifted.

Expression of our community in words and prose style.

Our tagline catchphrase.

Stories and adventures about experiences.

for each one of these areas, different things come to mind.

It's very creatively woven together in the prompt.

again speaking with an organizer's hat expressions and taglines are how in the dot outreach and in the co-organizing for events

It's how we communicate with those who are giving CW a first chance.

Like it's the first time they've heard of this concept of complexity, or they know some or a lot about complexity, but maybe they haven't thought about it in terms of a participatory global online community of practice.

Maybe they haven't considered some of these value or ethic-driven or just engagement-centered aspects of applying complexity, though they may be very familiar with expressions, taglines, and so on around researching and learning complexity.

Others may be deep, deep, deep in the applying complexity and not even know that there are people who see that and call it complexity.

And so then what are the expressions and taglines and stories and adventures that help open and unpack

complexity so that it doesn't feel like another ball to juggle or another burden to carry, but something that's actually joyful and aligned, if not even improving what we're already doing.

And joy complex city.

Very deep wordplay.

Thank you for sharing.

The backstage of complexity systems, learning from each other, learning by doing.

That's awesome.

Tackling complexity together.

Wow.

I think this may be the first time I've seen the backstage metaphor.

It's the scene behind the scene, the scene within the scene, the scene during the scene, the sub scene, the nested scene.

where people from all over who are learning and applying in diverse domains and in different life stages can come together and learn from each other and learn by doing just like the post it says and

part of that is showing up which is the implicit or explicit recognition that one has something to both learn and share even with their silence so that's really awesome I really like this backstage idea

it's a development on the classical shakespearean all the world's a stage tackling complexity together the challenge to tackle that's so nice it was also written twice now it looks like we're turning into the narrative

exploration space.

Scene plus scene equals sequence.

Sequence plus sequence equals story.

Thanks for this very insightful framing of narrative.

How could we think about the different journeys, adventures, and experiences

that different participants may have in an event and before during and after events as scene plus scene sequences and sequence plus sequence stories like here's what my plan is for the weekend first there's the live stream scene and all the cool people

Backstage onstage in between backstage and onstage in the jam board who are making it happen from the comfort of their homes then We will engage in a different scene.

The scene will change will be in gather.

It's gonna look different.

It's gonna feel different and then that's a sequence of events and

Then for this second interval, I will be doing something else.

And that's the weekend story.

Those stories can include like, again, just kind of building on this because I think this is great.

The story could include multiple complexity weekend sessions, right?

So for example, first I went to Facilitator A's session and they brought up these two things.

Sequence.

And then I went to Facilitator B's session and after that session, like a few of us continued to talk and we're still talking to this day and we're exploring what kind of projects we might be able to do.

Or the story could involve one CW and one non-CW aspect.

Like it was a really busy weekend, but I was super glad because I was able to drop in very quickly and connect with a few people during the one-on-one sessions and get the link to the live stream, which I'll check out later.

And then I went back to doing XYZ.

And that's a story about that person's weekend that includes complexity weekend, but maybe they only spent 30 minutes or one hour or two hours involved.

And it looks like someone has also augmented it.

Yes, series spinoff.

Great.

Awesome thinking here.

Mythology of complexity turns playgrounds.

Yes, also great.

We can play in the jungle gym, swinging from branch to branch, trying not to crash into too many trees.

And we have the open field where the mythos is situational and local.

But situational arising with implicit and explicit shared constraints will generate shared experiences and more.

Let's go in our last 12 minutes to number six.

experience, multimodal look and feel, texture, space, visual and audible expressions of our community, our colors and fonts, textures and elements that help us navigate through within and beyond our community.

Very interesting.

Again, I will just try to pull out some key terms.

Awesome.

And just while everyone is heading over to slide six, I'm pasting down at the bottom.

This is the gather link that will be where we go.

It's also in your calendar event and in the email you've been sent.

If you registered, it's all good.

If you didn't register, it's open.

but we'll be heading to this gather link in just 10 minutes.

But for the last 10 minutes, we'll hang out on this open field.

Though quickly, marks are being made.

Okay.

August wrote in chat,

I had another idea for a tagline for complexity weekend, the emergence of minds.

Awesome.

Thank you.

also just as people are heading over here just to give a thought on this area which is really important so jana thanks a lot for preparing this perfect amount of slides for us to work through today these aspects that are listed like our experience from a sensory multi-sensory perspective

is on one hand an opportunity to dive into qualitative and quantitative aspects of complexity.

On the other hand, it's an opportunity to dive into some of the more applied aspects of complexity, like accessibility in a digital and in a physical context, communication,

making sure that the colors and fonts are not just symbolic or esoteric but accessible soft i.e soft skills awesome yes anyone please add more information like what are soft skills or why are they important how are they related to complexity

Harmony, i.e.

musical.

Awesome, yes.

Harmonious collaboration.

That's not just a table of metronomes playing the same frequency.

It's not even just different instruments playing the same note.

It's different.

instruments and different notes rainbow awesome I guess as a very mundane example for uh colors and fonts I'll add what Google provides dot dot dot dot dot for now

Because that's the affordances that we have.

We have these five colors of sticky notes in this Jamboard space.

But as mentioned a little earlier with the tech developments, we want to be moving towards digital platforms that are

Open source, aligned with our vision and values in the platform's design and functionality, customizability, attributes related to privacy, all these different features.

And that looks like many different things.

Cohesion, the term so nice that it's said twice.

And it is related to harmony.

cohesion is minimum of two.

Bucky Fuller said, unity is plural and at minimum two.

Two things can't cohere unless they're different.

Single things don't have to cohere.

And so just like harmony, there's not harmony with one.

Harmony is minimum two.

And so it also connects to rainbow and to minds, plural and

which is like we are different together and something different happens when we're different together.

And that's perhaps related to the emergence of minds.

Okay, turning to navigation.

Navigate through, within, and beyond our community.

Well, just as framed in the prompt, there's navigating within,

to the community.

Maybe that's even like a unknown or a secret journey.

And then there's just navigating the realities of online communities at this point.

We can't just lie in the recliner and have everything necessarily brought to us.

Yet, of course, we don't want undue friction or confusion and uncertainty about how and when to participate.

but there's always going to be some aspect of navigating even within Complexity Weekend.

And as people, to the extent they want to, engage in committees, they'll find that there are new and different documents, also ones that are participatory and learning and applying complexity, but there's new and different paths that not all see.

yellow brick road the wizard of oz great movie slash story open source improvisation yeah it'd be awesome um to keep on exploring some of these here's the yellow bricks they're all connected somewhere over the rainbow emergence of minds

Awesome.

Well, we have about three minutes left here in the Jamboard.

And then at that point, we'll go to this Gather link.

one-on-one session where whoever is here is here and we'll have one-on-one and small group discussions where we start to take some of this thinking and move it into the next steps

just to, in these last minutes, reflect a few other slides that were also created in the September weekend.

So I'll just kind of show them and then that'll be the close.

What should Complexity Weekend City never become?

People can see different ideas.

What kind of events would you like to see in Complexity Weekend City?

When being invited by a friend to spend a weekend at Complexity Weekend City, what would make you want to come?

What are your expectations in terms of hospitality at Complexity Weekend City?

Awesome.

Great inputs.

Really appreciate those who join.

So

This was a fun live stream, hopefully for you too.

It'll be the end of it now.

And then we'll head over to this gather link and continue the rest of the synchronous activities of the heartbeat.

So thank you all.

See you in gather.