SPEAKER_01:
Just gonna repeat that since I'm not sure if we were live right there, but welcome everyone to the July 2021 heartbeat for Complexity Weekend.

We're really excited that you're joining us either live and or in replay.

We're gonna have 25 minutes of music by Michael Garfield, AKA Future Fossils, one of our awesome facilitators.

And then we're going to jump into the organizer's introduction.

We're going to have some facilitators on the stream, and then we're going to do an interactive Jamboard.

So again, if you're watching us live or in replay, thanks so much for joining.

We hope to see you over in Gather where it kind of all goes down.

And for the next 25 minutes, enjoy some Michael Garfield music, and then we'll see you soon.

Also, this animation on the bottom left is by Nathaniel, aka ThinkByDoing.

Pretty cool, pretty cool.


SPEAKER_02:
You ready?


UNKNOWN:
Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

so so

Rawr!

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_03:
Hey there.


SPEAKER_01:
All right.

Awesome.

Thanks, Michael Garfield, for that great music.

welcome everyone to the july 2021 heartbeat we're really excited that you're here watching live or in replay please feel free to use the live chat post any questions or anything you want to talk about right in the chat box i'm daniel and i'm in northern california and lucas please introduce yourself


SPEAKER_03:
Hello, I'm Lucas.

I'm from Brazil.

And yeah, I've been an organizer in the Complex Weekend since March, and that's my second heartbeat that I'm organizing.

And yeah, I'm really excited for that.


SPEAKER_01:
thank you lucas yep true a second time harpy organizer not sure that might be a first so we'll introduce the rest of the co-organizers later in the video today in this video in the first 20 minutes we're gonna give an organizer's introduction to complexity weekend just talk a little bit about who we are and talk about the registration from our last weekend which was in may 2021

And then we'll talk a little bit about this event that you're all a part of, which is the July 2021 Heartbeat.

So welcome to the Complexity Weekend Community of Practice.

For complex systems, the history and the initial conditions matter a lot.

So just to kind of catch people up wherever they are coming in from, our first Complexity Weekend was in May 2019 in San Francisco, and it was in person as this proof of picture demonstrates.

Then there were some changes in the world between late 2019 and the beginning of 2020.

And so since then we've been online and it's been really awesome to have these online weekends, to have our community of practice go online.

And as this slide shows, we've had just growth in the number of participants and the number of facilitators, the number of teams coming out of each weekend, each time we've done this cohort based weekend.

Anything you wanted to add about this, Lucas?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, so it's actually very nice to see people getting to know Complexity and connecting to people and also actually creating a community.

So yeah, I really wanted to see this community to grow even more.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Yep.

You know, complexity is a long walk.

And so it's always better when you can learn by doing with other friends, especially when you get to meet them along the way.

So that's what we've been really lucky to have.

Also, a key piece of complexity is multiple perspectives, multiple representations.

So that was one way of looking at Complexity Weekend.

And another way of looking at Complexity Weekend is as this event-specific

organism happening and growing through time renewing through time so on the y-axis of this chart is kind of like the community energy it's the number of people who are synchronously online or the number of teams you can join at that moment and it has these big peaks twice a year those are the weekends themselves so october 2020

May 2021, and then the weekend that we're just starting to plan for in November 2021.

And then these smaller peaks each month are the monthly heartbeat.

So we do those two big weekends per year.

And then the other 10 months per year are these smaller peaks in energy reflecting the heartbeats.

So those are the way that we kind of have the community come together with high energy relatively less frequently, and then have these more frequent gatherings where we get to on ramp and welcome people who are totally new to the community, which is maybe 30 or 50% of the people for each of these events.

and also connect across alumni cohorts for people who have been through the weekend.

And then in the background there with that yellow line is you and your team, because as a community of practice, we really welcome and want to scaffold you on your complexity journey, developing and working with a team to have impact using complexity.

Any thoughts on this one, Lucas?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, so I think that it's very important that people be aware that they are also part of this.

So basically being proactive and attending our pre-events and connecting to people and meeting people that have similar interests.

And yeah, our goal here is also to connect people and see they work and have fun.


SPEAKER_01:
Agreed.

So yet another representation of Complexity Weekend, a little bit less temporal and more role-based, is in terms of thinking of the community as this role-based and event-specific community of practice.

The biggest circle, this green circle, is the participants.

If you're listening to this live or in replay, or if you're involved in any way, you're a participant in Complexity Weekend.

And the two big on-ramps for participants are this big heart, that's the monthly heartbeat, so right where we are right now, you're in the right spot,

or these biannual weekend cohorts, which are, again, where we have this cohort-based weekend.

And that's a bit more of a focus on the asynchronous component and on the team building.

Then we have event organizers who step up into organizing each month or each biannual weekend.

So those are participants as well.

We have event facilitators.

Event-specific facilitators are those who just step up and say, yeah, you know, I think I could kind of catalyze a session or bring something interesting to the community.

And we'll talk more about our facilitators soon.

And then on the peripheries and on the interfaces of our community, we have associates and supporters.

Those are those who contribute with financial or non-financial means to make sure that our community can exist for a long time.

And of course, teams inside, on the border, and on the outside of Complexity Weekend, where the teams are learning by doing and they're making impact through applying complexity.

Any thoughts on this, Lucas?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, so I'm actually starting as a participant and then I got to know what is Complex Weekend and trying to get familiarized with, you know, with everything.

And then, yeah, I switched to organizer and

uh yeah just to get more connected and actually uh get my hands dirty and yeah well next step is to become a facilitator which i'm going to do also this event and yeah so everyone is welcome to you know take steps and play more roles here in the community it's very fun


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Thanks for that.

Yep, it's totally true.

You just dip in as a participant.

As you get a feel for things, you're totally welcome to facilitate a session, some kind of session that we facilitated before or a new kind of session.

It's all awesome.

So who are we as participants?

Well, can't say that we collect too, too much data on everyone, but just to give some representative statistics from our previous May 2021 weekend, we had truly global participation.

We had about 200 plus registered participants who wanted to be a part of that May 2021 cohort.

and representing more than 50 countries and more than 30 facilitators.

So we had about a third of participants from the US and then we had this awesome distribution of countries.

So we faced some new challenges and of course, opportunities with

what does it mean to really plan and include people across all time zones?

There's no magic time when everyone's awake, different sleeping schedules, different time zones.

What does it mean to include people across all these countries?

And beyond just our time zones or which country we're a citizen of, it's really about the diverse perspectives that we bring to the table.

We made some word clouds and we represented the kinds of problems that people were interested in applying complexity to.

And there's a few common terms, but then there's just this total fractal long tail of things that people are interested in.

And that's where these teams

really the magic starts to happen is when we connect people on, yes, the big terms that they're all a fan of or at least familiar with, like systems thinking or design thinking, development, climate change, evolution, whatever happens to be community.

And then there's this long tail where every person brings their unique view.

And then on the right side,

have a histogram asking what is your familiarity with learning and applying complexity one to ten self-assessed you know there's no degree there's no test that's not what we're about but just self-assessed do people feel really familiar with complexity or do they feel like they're a total complexity curious beginner and there's almost this flat distribution maybe a little uncanny valley at nine

but we really have a community across all familiarities with complexity from people who are just learning about it and hearing about it for the first time, ranging to people who are really working in a career for many years or decades in complexity.

What do you think about that, Lucas?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, what I think is really cool about that is basically you can, you know, speak from people from everywhere with different backgrounds and you can actually learn things that you would never, I don't know, never, but to take a while to discover.

and yeah maybe even not discover if you're not if you don't have this experience you know connecting to you know different people so yeah and I think that uh no one learns complexity and it's like uh in one time and I think we are always learning about complexity and yeah I uh

listening to people and speaking to people is a very useful way to learn about complexity and getting different perspectives.


SPEAKER_01:
Totally agree.

You just nailed it with no one learns complexity in one time and also no one learns alone.

So that's what motivates us to do what we do.

Let's quickly go through some of our purpose, values, and guidelines.

Then we'll talk about the heartbeat for July 2021 itself.

Then we'll bring a facilitator on stream and have an interactive Jamboard component.

So I'll read this and then Lucas, you can provide a thought.

So what brings us all together is our shared purpose and interest in complexity science.

We have a desire to have impact on co-creative teams and to improve our community of practice through feedback, participation and peer mentorship.

And we have the desire to uphold our core values and develop our community.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, so that's what I really like about complexity and, you know, build a community and, you know, build a network of people that have the same interests.

Yeah, in general, I would say that complexity is something new, worldwide.

And, you know, being in touch with, you know, people who are interested on that is a very nice way to...


SPEAKER_01:
uh to give more evidence to this topic and yeah and help us to learn together totally agreed it's like there's one foot that we share that's what brings us together and then where everyone else goes with their other foot is kind of where the fun and the creativity in lies right our collective purpose

And also all these are work in progress and we have a document with more information which anyone can request to see.

Our collective purpose is that we learn complexity science by doing.

We serve through deep time and we include to innovate.

Diversity is key.

Any thoughts on that?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, so basically being a organizer is, you know, learning by doing because all our meetings that we have, we are working on something complex, organizing those heartbeats and those events are complex.

And yeah, so I think

What we do here is actually get our hands dirty and actually putting people to speak and to have fun discussions and constructive discussions.

And yeah, I think that's the purpose here.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep, organizing is just another team, just another project.

And our system of interest is Complexity Weekend itself.

Maybe you'll find your system of interest is the crypto market or it's the needs of a local community, whatever it happens to be.

Our core values are that, just to summarize, Complexity Weekend is itself a complex system.

We think education is active.

We learn complexity science by doing.

Teamwork makes the dream work.

Participation means accessibility and inclusion for all.

Respect is key and step up and be brave.

Which one of those is kind of resonating with you tonight?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, for me, basically the most important one is respect.

And yeah, basically each person has different opinions and ideas about certain things.

And it's very important for,

for us here to have constructive discussions and debates and don't judge each other's ideas and opinions and yeah like we said before just have fun and be respectful with people and build things together


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome, totally agree.

And the way that we implement or enact the core values is through the participation guidelines.

So again, this is just the tip of the iceberg of participation, but we welcome you to adopt a complexity thinking mindset, whatever that means to you, to raise communication as a key principle, both the one-on-one relationships, which we'll talk more about soon, as well as the team communication.

We're online, so we embrace technology, but we also know its limits and we wanna use good audio and visual etiquette.

So whether that's muting, if there's noise in the background or just giving an extra second in case there's lag, you're talking to someone on a different continent or recognize that no online platform is perfect, just work with the technology we have.

We welcome your full participation and still appreciate our diverse abilities and diverse bandwidths.

And we welcome people to reach out on the edges and stay involved.

So maybe if it were someone's first heartbeat, Lucas, what would you recommend as like a really important guideline for them?


SPEAKER_03:
Basically, like you said, to participate and don't be afraid to open the microphone and speak.

It's supposed to be a safe place and no need to worry.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Yep.

And if you talk a lot in your day job, just listen and vice versa.

That's what's so fun.

And surely in the chat, hi, Edges.

It's like, hello.


UNKNOWN:
Hello.


SPEAKER_01:
So onto the second part of this organizer introduction, we're gonna talk a little bit just about what this heartbeat is going to entail.

And then we're going to welcome a facilitator on the stream and go through an interactive Jamboard with you all.

We had a awesome team of six co-organizers this month.

There was myself, Sneha, Lucas, Nathaniel, Kishore and Sean.

So Lucas, any thoughts like how is this organizing different than maybe the previous time you organized or what was new about organizing this time?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, basically the first time that I organized a heartbeat, it was only me and you.

So it was just us two having the weekly meetings and having ideas.

And yeah, but this heartbeat basically had six people and yeah, most of those people are in different time zones and yeah, there are

more different cultures and yeah it was very fun to you know connect and get to know more and work together with all of those people and it was really fun to see how each person has a different perspective and has their own ideas that

is useful, that's helpful for organizing this event.

And yeah, basically being able to connect our ideas in one piece so everyone has their own, can take part on this project.

And yeah, it was a very fun, co-creative process.


SPEAKER_01:
Totally agree.

It really is like a fractal or like a holograph.

Like we have Nathaniel who produced some of the art, other facilitators who are reached out to by these co-organizers, other people who gave important insights early on.

It's like many hands make the work light.

so we all participated in different ways synchronously and asynchronously and then down on the bottom of course if you're interested in co-organizing even if this is your first time coming to a heartbeat you're welcome to be a co-organizer you're just given access to a folder that has all the information you need and you're a total co-equal co-organizer so if you're interested in that email us or just get in touch

The facilitators are the ones who catalyze the participant experience.

So there's the edge relationships with the participants.

And then there's the facilitators who aren't giving a talk.

They're not giving a training.

It's not just simply a workshop.

They're the ones who kind of

set the stage or the crucible for the interactions to happen.

So we really welcome Paul, Giri, Sid, Nathaniel, Justin, and Jana, and all of them are going to be leading different types of sessions ranging from kind of a office hour with a technical bent all the way to just embodied and really interactive experiences.

So we hope that you check out the program where you can learn more about with a description

what kinds of cool activities these facilitators are going to be leading and then if the time zone works for you please fully show up if the time zone doesn't work know that maybe another time it will and send us a message send them a message just to know what time might work and lucas you're going to be doing a session too so what is that going to be


SPEAKER_03:
This is going to be our usual one-on-one session, which is a session in which people get to know other people and

introduce themselves and talk about why they are interested in complexity, what they do.

And yeah, it's just something to make people connect with others.

And it's very important for team building and community building itself.


SPEAKER_01:
Totally agreed.

And that will be happening just right after this live stream.

So you're on YouTube watching this now, but the rest of the heartbeat is going to be happening on our Gather space.

It's a link that's in the program, and also it will be posted in the live chat here.

Just in case you haven't used Gather before, the gear on the top left is the settings.

And then on the bottom left, you can switch between looking at the chat, which is kind of like an ephemeral chat, or the people tab, which lists the people who are there at that time.

On the bottom bar, you can access features like adjusting how your avatar looks, you can set your status, you can respond, you can look at a mini map, you can share your screen, you can do an emoji, which is kind of a transient symbol, unless you do the raised hand and then it stays up, or you can turn your video on or off.

So that's kind of Gather, but just like Complexity, the best way to use Gather and learn it is to learn by doing.

So just jump in the link,

Truly feel welcome and just email us or contact us somehow if you're having any challenges with it.

Here's the program and it's intentionally small font because the single source of truth is always gonna be the live document itself.

So head over to the program itself and maybe Sean, you can repost that in the chat.

And here you'll see we're up in this live stream, welcome and overview section.

We're gonna jump into a Jamboard with a facilitator.

And then again, the rest of the weekend is going to be in Gather itself.

So any just kind of overall,

thoughts on the program or what people can look forward to this weekend, Lucas?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I think people really should look forward, like I said, to meeting other people and connect with other people and really hear nice things from the facilitators and learn, get new insights and learn about different topics that will also contribute for their knowledge on complexity.

And yeah, I'm excited for this weekend.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

So to close this section out, your feedback and your word of mouth recommendations are really the best way for our community of practice to grow.

So just bring a friend next time.

That's the most special for us.

If you want to support us financially, we have a PayPal link here.

And just let us know if you have another mechanism you prefer.

Your contributions go towards funding future events like the bandwidth for Gather, as well as honorariums for our facilitators for the weekend, as well as scholarships and sort of micro grants, programs that we want to have community run in the near future.

We're going to welcome the facilitators Yaro on.

Let me just repost the Jitsi link just so that they'll be able to join.

But in closing, we're going to hear from Yaro for a few minutes, just a quick introduction, what kind of session we can look forward to experiencing.

And then we're going to go all together to a Jamboard.

Welcome, Yaro.

So, hello, how are you?

We're gonna hear an introduction from you and then we will hop over to a Jamboard.

I'll post the link in the live chat and then we'll just sort of talk and hang out on that Jamboard.

So welcome and feel free to give a couple of minutes, just who are you?

How'd you come to Complexity or Complexity Weekend?

And what can people look forward to when they're going to your live session?


SPEAKER_04:
Just wanna start by thanking you guys for hosting us and for inviting us into this conversation.

And this kind of, this came together out of,

basically through the praxis of what we're doing with Complexity in terms of stretching these online tools, practicing working through conversation.

And it's been such a learning process in terms of just sort of being a little more mutable and engaged in a multi-subjective process.

And that's,

pretty much the core theme, I think, of what we're seeking to talk about.

Specifically, we're going to talk about epistemology.

The title of the talk is An Epistemological Leap

beyond the text.

It's something that I've been ruminating on for years now, inspired by Jacques Derrida, and I did a lot of writing on my own, and then eventually my interest somewhat dissipated in the sense of not quite finding the cohorts to really hold these ideas with me, until recently when I was lucky enough to meet Gary Lejos, who is a software designer who is developing what is called MindGraph,

And this technology is all about context building.

So specifically annotation tools, similar to what we see with a hypothesis.

So we're looking at how we kind of can map bodies of texts

and reveal their relationships by using, technically speaking, distributed graph databases.

So doing intratextual addressing in order to reference and to give commentary and annotation.

as far as the epistemology goes, to quote Ghiari, we reject the objectivist concept of the impersonal single version of truth, or as he says, the view from nowhere.

And working at this intersection of human dialogue and conversation and

technology, this is a seriously important theme of how can we utilize our technology in a way that is facilitating human truth telling in this process, this multi-subjective conversational process of

of circling, circumnavigating texts, circumnavigating ideas, and part of sort of the philosophical

ground that I'm sort of walking on is this personal belief that all of our forms of true telling, whether that is speaking or writing or even doing science, all of these lenses for expressing are all sorts of writing.

And as Jacques Derrida introduced through a reading of Plato's Timaeus and the Myth of the Korah,

we're really interested in stepping outside of the disciplinary confines and getting into a kind of truth-telling ecosystem that can engage all genres of truth-telling.

So it's all about context and seeing from many perspectives and what Nora Bateson calls warm data.

How can we leverage the human wisdom, the human experiences, and how can we reveal through contextualization and through the process, the praxis of reading and writing together?

That's what we're gonna be talking about tomorrow.

I hope to see you there.

Really looking forward.

It's a really great honor.

So thank you guys so much.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Thanks for that intro.

Let's draw that out a little bit as we go through the Jamboard.

So the Jamboard link has been posted in the live chat.

and we're going to head over to the second slide so there's on the top of your screen uh where it says like one out of 14 just hit the right arrow and you'll go to the second slide asking what is your intention today so i welcome yarrow and then lucas i'll type anything out you write what is your intention today and everyone else is of course welcome to add their own little post-its and we'll highlight anything cool we see so yarrow first


SPEAKER_04:
Can I just speak?

Yep, please.

Okay.

Well, I think the grounding intention is to continue to practice this multiplayer sense-making, which is a lot about, I think, listening, as you said, and seeing how we're speaking into conversation, into context.

Just getting comfortable in that process with you guys.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

And Lucas, what would you say?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, like every time that I come to a Complex Weekend event, my intentions are always meeting new people and getting new insights and learning.

But more specifically today, since I am facilitating a one-on-one session, my real intention is to have people connected and having people making networks.

And yeah, I'm really excited to do that.

And yeah, I hope it goes well.


SPEAKER_01:
Yara, when you were talking and you said that that rejection of the view from nowhere and connected that to this ecosystem perspective, I just kind of imagined this eagle swooping down on some sort of prey.

I was like...

there's clearly not just some objective perspective.

There's the eagle, there's the prey, there's the ecologist, there's the trail camera, wherever it is.

It's like, whatever the situation is, we're taking a view from somewhere.

And then you talked about circumnavigating and how that like kind of circling around something gives us multiple perspectives, not every perspective and certainly not all at once, but it's like, we have these complex events happening in the real world.

And then we take different perspectives on them.

So I really like, and I resonate with that with someone wrote, hold an open mind, interact with people and ideas.

That's pretty cool.

And so it's awesome.

Ride the wave.

Awesome that we're hearing so much great stuff coming from our facilitators and also cool to see what people have already written on there.

Maybe just one more question on this slide before we move on.

What is the importance or the relevance of intention in complex systems?


SPEAKER_04:
Is that a question for me?

I would just say that as Giri, we've been discussing this a great deal in terms of we sort of began this conversation by talking about ontology and how can we represent data objects that mean something in the real world.

And how can we decide together how to represent those, say, Jason Skimmons and thinking about sort of like semantics and how do we decide, you know, what is a legitimate structure for truth?

And what he told me was that

It doesn't matter.

It's all about intentions, which says something about how it's all perspective, at least that we can speak to, is grounded in a subject and a living experience.

And so from his perspective, it seems that everything that we're speaking is anchored in that intention.

That's a really good question.

I'll keep thinking about it.


SPEAKER_01:
Any thoughts on that, Lucas?

Or it's okay, I've talked.


SPEAKER_03:
I mean, in general, like for me, the importance of complexity is basically building more educational, more resilient environments.

And that's my biggest intention in complexity, helping build work, help

how can I say that, like work on building more resilient places and environments and organizations.

And because the main concept of complexity, which is that everything's connected, that the sum of the parts is more than just the unit, makes a lot of sense to me.

And I used to struggle a lot working in my organization, in the company that I used to work.

that things were not resilient, things were not effective.

And once I started looking to complexity and seeing that how things and learning about the connection of things, everything started to make more sense.

And it was a way for me to how I can act in the place that I am.

And yeah, for me, the importance is to create more resilient environments


SPEAKER_01:
And that really ties to Yara.

You mentioned that multiplayer sensemaking.

It's like, we're not in a first person shooter.

We're not in solitaire.

We're in a different kind of a game.

It's a knowledge game or it's a mind game and it's certainly multiplayer.

So we'll head to that.

Oh yeah.

We'll head to the third slide and people can start saying a bit about who they are and how they discovered complexity.

And then please Yara, go for it.


SPEAKER_04:
Oh, I just, I really love what you just said.

And it really rings true for me that everything that we're doing is all about creating the intention of opening these ecosystems.

And even what Giri and I are carrying and wanting to present, it's really, we're talking about the foundation for writing communities and the on the ground sort of activism that I've been doing.

What I've been seeing is that all of the things that to me are the most important

All of these communities are at the ground.

At bottom, they're all writing communities, whether that's self-government or one of my interests is cooperative publishing.

That's obviously a writing community.

Or whenever we come together as an association for an initiative, we're writing our truth together.

And that's all about our intention and the wholesomeness of that.

And if we're successful, then there's an ethos that we brought in of mutual respect.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Um, so maybe just because this is your first time on a stream and to complexity weekend, just how did you discover complexity, whether just the word itself or more of like the Santa Fe Institute complexity that a lot of people might be familiar with?

How did you come across that?

And were you a complexity thinker and you dove into the writing side?

Or were you coming from a writing perspective and found complexity?


SPEAKER_04:
I was thinking very critically about democracy.

I remember at that time I was reading Cornel West's American Innovation and Philosophy.

It's on American pragmatism and a lot of other books, probably Jacques Derrida and a lot.

And really, honestly, I just felt a call that there's something, some solution, something we can do with technology that

to transcend these geographic temporal boundaries.

And I literally, I walked outside and I'm just, I'm like calling out for answers.

I literally, I kind of called to the universe, like,

what would it be like for us to have collective intelligence in my mind, probably.

And the message that I got was, first off, it's about belief and it's about perspective.

And then I got this vision that it was about differentiation and seeing from many different perspectives.

And so that led me to seeking and towards integral thought and eventually toward Jordan Green Hall talking about collective intelligence.


SPEAKER_03:
yeah that was my path then it called me out i think awesome really cool to hear what about you lucas or what kind of comes to mind now yeah so i actually discovered a complexity uh you know i just graduated in i just got my bachelor's degree international relations then i was

basically searching for master's programs.

And since I am into innovation and startups, I found a very cool program in Europe called Transition Innovation and Sustainability Environments.

And I was reading about this program and this program actually has a complexity approach.

And I was like, what is complexity?

And I started learning and searching about complexity.

And for me, it made a lot of sense.

I really got into this topic, and I really wanted to dig into that because for my whole experience working in startups, complexity is a total match.

And yeah, since then, I've been

into complexity and reading about complexity and also I found Complexity Weekend.

And yeah, so basically that is my journey with complexity.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

It's almost like it's a multi-lane highway, but there's certainly one path that we're starting to see here.

And also Dr. Proton, Sean, has tagged himself.

So that's like people can always give their key base name or give their name if they want people to contact them about something they've written on a Jamboard or it can be totally a non.

there's sort of this like reading and questioning and asking those hard questions that don't seem to be covered within the current ways of thinking.

And then sometimes after going deep enough down that path, it's like, how do we apply this?

And then also just like you mentioned there with the startups, that's like applying complexity.

So the third piece of learning and applying is community.

So that's like this orange one that says, my colleague at work told me about complexity weekend after we were brainstorming how to tackle some systems thinking and complexity mindset approach.

So there's like at least those three doorways.

There's asking those questions about collective intelligence, about emergence, and then there's applying.

How are we going to act in this market or in this sector that's so rapidly changing?

And then there's community.

Like my friend just brought me in and said, hey, this would be really cool.

cb wandering outside the bright lights looking for my keys that's perhaps a reference to the allegory of somebody who's searching for their keys underneath the street light and the neighbor says let me help you and looks with them and they don't find it and then it's like oh well where did you lose those keys and it's like i lost them over there in the dark but i'm looking here because this is where the light is

And so maybe that's kind of like our current non-complexity research or application or even communities where it's easy to look where the light is, but then when we go into the gray and into the twilight, that's where we start to maybe discover.

And then here's another one.

Study complex adaptive systems.

in a graduate program in sustainable design.

So that also kind of connects those pieces together.

Like it's a cohort based program.

There's the ideas, there's the learning, there's the applying, you know, people are studying sustainable design or agriculture because there's a real world and it really matters who we design for and how we design for them.

And if we can grow those crops or not, or if it's gonna be resilient to climate change or not, like that's the real world.

So it's cool to see all these different thoughts on how people came to complexity.

Any other thoughts on this one or we can head to the next question?

Yep, we can head.

Cool.

So we'll go to four.

Here we have a little bit of a continuum slash non-duality.

People can do whatever they want graphically with it.

And there's complexity at the top and it says learning and applying.

So we have, how do we learn and apply complexity?

It's just a question we're going to spiral back to probably forever because it's such a great and such a generative question, but maybe Yaro and then Lucas, like what comes to mind when you see this?


SPEAKER_04:
Well, what comes to mind for me is that it's easier said than done sometimes if you don't practice.

And that I've learned, I feel that I've learned a lot of personal lessons and maturity in just the process of learning.

working in teams working in a in a multiplayer organism.

And that's both in the real world and online.

But that practice has really accelerated, I think a lot of growth for me.

And yeah, I still have a lot to learn, I think.


SPEAKER_01:
Lucas


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, it is a long line, the learning process of complexity.

Like I said, we're never going to nail 100%.

But yeah, I would say that at the moment I am in the learning and applying process.

We're going to constantly learn about complexity.

But for me, applying is the issue.

me uh and other people here in complexity that i have spoken uh always intrigued on how they can apply complexity which is yeah it it can be very hard you know because uh it's not it doesn't depend only on you you know it depends on the people that you are surrounded and how do we uh make other people aware

of complexity you know like how do we show them that yeah this is cool and if you actually and if you if we apply this you're going to have better results maybe and yeah but what i try to do is to you know work with complexity in my smaller space and you know when uh and it's like uh when we do in our spaces and you know try to

uh to be a reference to others and maybe others can you know uh start to copy what i'm doing in my smaller space and yeah but it's it's complex


SPEAKER_01:
Cool, thank you.

So we have towards the applying side, someone wrote iteration MVP, maybe minimum viable product and rapid prototyping.

So that's the sort of complexity as process

implications of complexity, meaning like it's better to try something out and then fail fast and keep on developing on it rather than build out this ice castle like Brian Arthur in the complexity economics.

I remember him talking about classical economics as this ice castle, like beautiful but fragile.

And then complexity economics might be contrasted with that.

So that's kind of cool to see about complexity as a process.

And then also like hearing from diverse perspectives, there's not enough room in the middle, but it totally applies to both sides.

And when I was starting to learn complexity, this is kind of what drew me in was like, rather than read five papers by the same author

i wanted to hear like five different perspectives on the same issue or you know papers that were directly contradictory to each other and then just ask like what is the world such that people could think about this issue their whole life and disagree they could think about emergence for decades and and honestly disagree

and how do we seek out those perspectives that are different after they've been really honestly thought through and then how can we be part of this bigger world this bigger picture where again honest well-intentioned people learn a lot and they disagree and they've spent more time on emergence than i'm ever going to be able to so that on the learning side was something i was always interested in and then it was really being exposed to the entrepreneurial side

and hearing from sean and from others like hey if you're going to be building a product that involves nurses you should talk to one as soon as possible and you should talk to multiple as soon as possible because you're going to be developing just in this weird vector unless you really include the stakeholders in the discussion and that was something i had just never heard of on the learning side no one said if you're talking about ecology you should talk to the farmer like that's not part of the normal ecology way of doing research

so hearing from diverse perspectives totally applies to both sides and then playing and making games that's fun again it could kind of apply to both sides and it's fun to ask like what are those complexity games or what are the games where when we're playing and when we're engaged in the play we see complexity shine through so any any last thoughts on this uh slide or we'll go to the next one

Cool, we'll go to five, which is what is something you're curious or wondering about?

So again, maybe Yaro, then Lucas.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, it's so funny.

As much as I keep kind of coming around the edge of this complexity concept, I have this...

this feeling that there's a lot under the surface that I have not uncovered.

And it's kind of cool.

I'm kind of just like, don't just surprise me later.

I'm going to find out more about what this is all about.

But yeah, I just, I wonder how deep the implications really go.

It's an open-ended question.


SPEAKER_01:
Great question.

What are the implications of complexity and how are we going to reduce our uncertainty about what it is and what it means?

Lucas?


SPEAKER_03:
I don't know.

It's a hard question.

Let me think.

Yeah, like someone just typed here, what is complexity?

It's a wide topic.

And I'm just curious just to really understand maybe the impact of complexity.

If government, if organizations, if they

use it if they use a complex approach uh in a general way like what would be the impact on politics the economy you know and yeah just to see how is the the the final impact of complexity yeah that's like a go ahead y'all


SPEAKER_04:
It's so interesting because it feels like this leaping off point, whereas historically, even the history of philosophy and just in general, sort of the hubris of the

pioneering human being to want to sort of capture and say, yes, we've done it.

This is it.

And it seems that with complexity, there's almost this kind of surrender of like, we'll never have it fixed.

It'll never be, it's irreducible.

It's this irreducible process.

And that does feel like it has implications and just like you could think of it in terms of, you know,

like the complexity of like physics, but it also, when we're talking about this multi-subjective emergent process, it kind of, it gets really to me and to almost like a spiritual perspective as well.

So very open-ended.


SPEAKER_01:
Also, what am I not curious about?

Help, please.

That almost reminds me of one view on education, like tabula rasa, blank slate.

It's empty and you fill it up.

You fill the cup with knowledge or you inscribe in the slate.

And then there's like the burning away of ignorance.

So it's like, what am I not curious about?

Maybe that's something that this person's wondering.

And then also like finding gaps in my knowledge, finding new connections between nodes and understanding.

nodes and edges, that's network thinking, that's topology.

So that just shows how we can take an idea that might be even a subfield of mathematics, something you could spend your whole life really going into the details on the proofs and the algorithms, but then also you can just pull back and just go, okay, what if nodes were people and edges were their social connections?

Or what if nodes were ideas and edges were the papers that mentioned them both?

So it's kind of how complexity ideas help us span that gap between just starting out and being an expert in a field, in a discipline by having a shared set of terms and of ideas that we can connect on.

So even if you've never heard of node and the idea of like connecting knowledge as nodes, I mean, yeah, it's something you're working on and probably in a really technical capacity.

So yeah.

where does complexity play a role in knowledge graphs?


SPEAKER_04:
Well,

Well, it's exactly as you said about network thinking and nodes and edges and the importance of that and why, what is so powerful about these graph databases.

And it's all about that, the open-endedness of being able to chart relationships, which is just a complete paradigm shift if we can utilize it in the right way versus a static data process

know sql database or even like um you know no sql database um um yeah and then that you know it really does get into like sort of back to um this philosophical idea that you know everything that we do in a creative capacity is

in a sense, a kind of writing.

Even the biologists talk about the autopoiesis of the cell of its self-creating sort of capacity.

And then, of course, the complexity of

of subatomic or quantum physics and this idea of entanglement.

And then it's that we're always held in this web of relationships.

And I've been thinking a lot about integrity in my human capacity and what that means and really feeling and how it feels like it's like being held in the tension of the tensegrity of my relationships.

So this network thinking, it's

Yeah, it's almost sort of ubiquitous in all of these different aspects of complexity.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

So let's do one more Jamboard slide together before we spend the rest of the heartbeat over in Gather.

Let's go to the seventh slide.

And it asks, what kinds of participant behaviors and norms can help us make Complexity Weekend an amazing space?

And we have on the left side, like things we wanna see, behaviors we wanna see, and on the right side, things that we want to avoid.

This is kind of our...

you know positive and our negative access that helps us navigate as individuals towards the community that we want to see so again maybe yarrow then lucas like you're involved in some other perhaps adjacent communities of practice so what have you seen that works or is good to avoid or is really just important for welcoming diverse community


SPEAKER_04:
Me?

Yep.

Well, it's so funny because I've spent all this time sort of preparing, and I'm going to make a presentation and it's going to be about this.

And sitting with you guys, I really feel that ethos of the emergence of, well, what's going to happen?

What's going to come out of this?

And so what I'm feeling into is that sort of open-endedness of just being in the flow, which I hear a lot of people

you know, representing those ideas and it just, it feels really good to really practice it, yeah.

And things that we wanna avoid, I guess, I don't know, just being stuck in a specific way of thinking.


SPEAKER_01:
cool and low that reminds me of you know the book on from psychology by susan mahali about flow where there's this diagram like capacity and the extent of the challenge and there's this big chal this big channel in the middle when your capacity is meeting the challenge basically and that's where flow happens whether you're skiing or playing chess or having a conversation

And so it's definitely really important when we're coming from just so many backgrounds, language skills,

familiarity with different books, just every dimension you can imagine, cultural, intellectual, whatever it happens to be, it's good to sort of feel out where your partner or where your group is at in that graph so that you can help each other co-navigate into flow rather than just super undershoot and maybe almost insult somebody by assuming they know less than they do or just totally fly over the top with some super technical view.

Lucas, what would you say or what's something that's important for either side?


SPEAKER_03:
Basically, Complex Weekend is about people.

And without people, Complex Weekend cannot exist.

So it's very important that people show up and participate and be proactive.

And like I said before, just don't be afraid.

Don't be shy.

just yeah talk about what you have in mind what are your ideas and yeah and for this what you have to avoid is basically uh have a uh I don't know if it's correct like a toxic environment you know like so no no judgment basically so

Here, we are not here to judge people, judge each other's idea.

It's supposed to be like a very healthy and welcoming environment.

So everyone is fine, open up their mics and be able to speak and interact with people.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool, and we have some great suggestions on the things we want to avoid.

Preconceived judgment, too much talking and not enough listening to others, exclusionary practices, jargon, and then over on the positive, the things that we do want to see, the human connection, accepting people where they are, feeling comfortable and curious.

So this has been...

An awesome livestream, Yaro.

It was just natural to have you come on and hang out with us and Lucas and the other co-organizers.

Awesome job for setting this up so that, of course, the participants could feel comfortable in that space.

We're going to close it off now and head over to the Gather space and we'll repost the link of what the Gather URL is.

And in just a few minutes, Lucas, we're going to have you facilitate a one-on-one session.

So thanks everyone.

Yep.

Thanks everyone for watching live for replay and check out the program for when is things happening and what they'll be.

We'll see you in Gather in just a few minutes.

So bye.