SPEAKER_01:
Hello and welcome everyone.

This is the November 2022 Complexity Weekend Heartbeat.

We're going to have about 10 minutes of music by Michael Garfield.

And then we'll have a one hour live stream with the Jamboard link posted in the YouTube live chat.

And then the rest of the heartbeat will be in the gather link of the calendar event.

All right, here's 10 minutes of Michael Garfield.

Talk to you soon.


SPEAKER_00:
Right on.


UNKNOWN:
Thank you.

so so

Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
All right.

Hello and welcome, everyone.

It's the November 2022 heartbeat at Complexity Weekend.

It's November 27th, at least where I am.

And hope everything is working on the stream.

Thanks for those who are joining in the chat.

You'll find the link to the program

and also to this Jamboard that I'm in right now, which will be great if people want to open the Jamboard.

This stream's going to begin with just some overview information and then most of this hour we can be exploring in the Jamboard and then end before the hour before we head over to the facilitated session with Michaela Emsch.

So let's begin with a Complexity Weekend overview and I'll jump over to the link that's shown here in the Jamboard.

So welcome, whether this is your first time or not, to Complexity Weekend, where different things happen each time.

I'm just briefly cropping again so we can see better.

Sorry about that.

Complexity Weekend is a global community of practice centered around learning and applying complexity.

And the link here can be unfolded to show a structural overview of Complexity Weekend.

The biggest circle of participation in Complexity Weekend is participant.

And then within each event, there are organizers who coordinate, especially with facilitators, facilitators who are going to, in their own ways, lead different kinds of interactive sessions, associates and supporters who are supporting the community through financial or non-financial ways, and

and different teams inside and outside of Complexity Weekend, and also committees, which are teams within Complexity Weekend that focus on Complexity Weekend functions, but these are also teams that are meeting regularly in some cases.

And then there are two primary on-ramps for Complexity Weekend, which are the monthly heartbeats, where people who are joining for the first time or coming back to reconnect can drop in, and the biannual weekend cohorts.

um to move into the 2022 review we can jump over to the events page so this year we had two kinds of events noted previously the heartbeat and the weekend we're currently in the november 2022 heartbeat

And here are the past events from the year.

We had an April 2022 weekend cohort and a September 2022 weekend cohort, as well as heartbeat events happening in January, February, March, May, June, July, August, October, and this one in November, which will be the final event for 2022.

as we relax and also open up some new developments and opportunities which we'll be coming to soon and these events have really been what people brought to them and there were some amazing sessions connections directions other people maybe we can on a jam board think back to some of our favorite memories from this year

A lot of things happened, so maybe we can put it there.

Also, at this Coda page, you can find the mission, purpose, values, and governance details of Complexity Weekend.

And this was a development within the .DAO committee

in this year so a lot has happened structurally from a complexity weekend perspective including the committees which uh brought a lot of new

skill and focus to a lot of the areas of Complexity Weekend.

So just to sort of highlight them.

.DAO did a lot of research and development, exploring different understandings of decentralized autonomous organizations.

and also did awesome work with the values i i won't name anyone specific for working on the committees because this is just uh offhand and only from what i saw so i don't want to just emphasize anything unduly but really appreciate everybody who joined all of the committees

And hopefully we can have better within our own platform, which is being developed and we can discuss when we get to .tech, we will have better transparency and preferences and visibility and so on.

So in .DAO, there was the research and development towards that DAO understanding.

which was at that time, just given our availability and the state of different technologies and our focus on accessibility and so on, we decided that it wasn't the right turn, but something really interesting to consider from a complexity perspective.

And also that is where we collected the various feedback and documents that we had previously had into what is represented in the value section on that

page previously seen.

.website and CRM, which is just like Community Relationship Manager, some of our developments here with Manifold, building our Complexity Weekend website into a platform where one can log in and register via a survey type response.

in their profile settings.

And that's a real structural change from our earlier spreadsheet-based pretty manual system.

So this is really a great development and is moving us far along in our vision to have an integrated participation platform at our website.

And also all of these are open to people who want to be participating more to them.

Wiki we explored but was not too active regarding knowledge stewardship and archival functions.

placemaking with their focus on developing the gather maps that were used for events and also more broadly on making a sense of place.

Dot teams, which developed the team before, during, after frameworks in their nascency this year.

especially focusing on the experience of teams during the cohort, during the weekend, and also bringing up a lot of other important topics.

.legal, working towards understanding different legal aspects of being an online community of practice and also working in the specifics towards

deciding what formal structures are best for this community.

.art, collecting art, which can now be used, for example, on the website, different media and types of art.

.finances, just the costs and receipts that we have as a community and connecting this to .legal.

.outreach, which was very active this year and worked on developing and implementing messages sent to different communities and different channels that we have access to.

So reconnecting with people who have previously joined and also connecting with new people

And then also doing some significant work towards what we'll discuss soon.

Onboarding.

Considering the onboarding process and different journeys and frictions that are related to onboarding in this context.

Facilitators, so those who have facilitated one or more session, and then those who want to help coordinate that for others.

And organizers, which is those who want to help coordinate or organize events.

That captures much of 2022 in terms of, at least from an organizational perspective,

perspective the structural developments especially to our website the uh two weekend cohorts and the heartbeat events that were implemented the development of committees the collation of values um and now i guess a topic that i'll just briefly mention

because there's many others who I think have a lot to share here and I hope that we can all bring this out in the coming weeks and months together.

But Complexity Weekend will be undergoing some significant developments.

Again, I won't add too many details because we're still forming them and especially just

Wanting to externalize it for those who want to join in at that stage of a new process where we will have a development of name and framing and pattern of gathering.

Also different changes with presentation and with technology.

So there's going to be a lot of changes in 2023 that will be happening in a staged way, not necessarily planned stage, but I'm sure following some logic of its own.

and so there are many opportunities for those who want to be involved in some fashion even with one committed hour per month or one hour per week which are both absolutely valid windows

for joining, organizing, facilitating committees, doing other types of work and really curating and co-creating the kind of space and community that we want to continue to develop with.

So if you want to get more involved in 2023,

One option, totally just stay attuned to the changes that will be developing in the coming months or make sure to send an email to complexityweekend at gmail.com or get in touch with us some other way or any of the other people who can get you in touch.

Or please recommend this to somebody who you think might have some capacity and availability

to want to contribute in this way.

Someone wrote, get involved.

It is fun.

And it wasn't even me making the post-it note.

Thank you.

All right.

Well, that's the general overview part of this video.

Let's just mention the program for today, which is also reflected on the homepage linked in the live chat.

Right now, we're in the live stream on YouTube.

The previous section was the organizer introduction, and then the next

minutes till before the end of the hour will be the interactive jamboard part following this live stream we'll all go to the gather atrium where first there will be a facilitated session by Michaela Emsch on ecotones

Following that, there will be one-on-one sessions where we have some small group and one-on-one conversations.

And then in the final hour of the session, we'll have spotlight talks.

And then once everyone has shared their thoughts,

piece of less than five minutes.

We can continue to discuss about other topics if we want.

So it'll be a nice, interesting interval.

Really looking forward to Michaela's session and to who shows up in the final sections.

Let's go to slide three in the Jamboard.

And I guess just ask about what we remembered or what we thought about 2022 in general or in a CW context.

And just to...

I guess, provide a few pieces of context and continuity while people are adding things that they want to on the right side here.

Here's just a few screenshots from the previous heartbeat.

memory trace of the last heartbeat just to read some of these well again while people who are here can please add anything they want so just to note from the previous heartbeat i noted the relation from the leaf to the tree feedback

is it more about purpose which is ongoing deep time versus present time data available in the moment seems to be accelerating making deep time perspective more difficult to see filter

Community activities which could benefit from the mental models for collective emergence being discussed here.

If synergistic, stigmatistic learning were a goal, do you think it makes more?

Maybe like a cell, keeping out what is not needed on bad, letting in what is as needed.

We are finite and limited.

How do we select what to filter out and what to let in?

We know what is bad and what is good by experimenting and considering the end goals.

But what if filtering changes the outcome or the taste of the coffee?

Or is it about the taste intensity that we're used to?

Filter to protect, to search, to contribute, to understand, step by step.

Goals, functions, needs, these can be subjective and relative.

How does filtering and limitations relate to complexity?

All right.

okay all right thank you for adding some images all right would love to see um sorry for moving i just wanted to make it a little larger um so whoever had written that we are here so maybe this can be a little bit like preparing us for some of these discussions that will be happening amongst us in

gather later but what what is the ecotone i can see that it's a boundary transitional space in this context between a forest and a grassland so what does that mean for an online space or for a social or a conceptual space

be in the ecotone what is the red line okay self-organization leads to consolidated success workouts for the brain and soul

One memory from this year.

I'll draw it, take a few minutes to draw it, and then I'll mention this membrane.

So I don't remember exactly what group or what time, but some image meme was shared by potentially someone in a cohort.

And there was a discussion of time and about all of these alternate counterfactuals that either did or didn't happen.

Some people believe they did happen in some multiple, plural, verse, multiverse, multiple world splitting.

Or they're just things that, quote, could have happened, but didn't happen.

Or they were imagined.

So they did happen in the mind, but they didn't really happen.

All of these things that now, at least our experience of it, is threading.

It was not exactly looking like this, but it had that kind of tree leading up to a filter in the now, and then a new tree, and then Shirley and Sean and several other people had made many really interesting

comments about this image.

Alright, so some of these notes, space of transition between and permeating boundaries, migration,

Oh, also just want to quickly note, Michaela wrote in the chat, the amazing Sabine Coulon will be my co-facilitator.

Just to note that.

Yeah.

Reading these post-its.

So what is CW or who are we between or among?

Is everybody between and permeating?

Is there something different and permeating about what?

People can add more post-its, but to give one thought on that, even in 2022,

Hello to people in the chat too.

Even in 2022, none of the events or the committee activities or the consulting projects, which we were able to work with several really talented firms on, for example, Eclosions and Manafall, none of those

modes of activity were anyone's full-time work.

Kind of goes without saying, but just to make that clear.

And in many cases, much, much less.

For example, even to join one four-hour block of a heartbeat every month is still only four hours per month.

Or to organize a heartbeat is only four hours a month, one hour per week.

Just different ranges that people committed.

So by the nature of that,

partial and fragmented commitment and a preference for global co-organization, which several, including Jana, excellently catalyzed and created this year.

Everyone is moving from, at the very least, here's the little sliver of time that we're joining events or just showing up for each other in a committee.

The blue ecotone zone.

And then this is some other scheduled activity for one person before and after that event.

Some people are going to sleep after.

Some people are just waking up.

So, um, workouts for the brain and soul.

Awesome.

Nice.

Also can't work out continually.

Edges, nodes and clusters.

And here's a cool image.

network science graphs for visualization and analysis very common and important tool in complexity in systems

Any other thoughts?

Let's go to slide four and then look at another previous set while people move to slide four.

Let's talk about complexity.

I'll get the right one.

Here we go.

Let's talk about complexity on slide four and what we learned, thought, did.

How did we learn and apply complexity this year?

All people are going to slide four.

We'll look at some previous, just exploration of what is complexity, but today we'll be thinking about it in terms of how we were learning and applying and feeling and so on about complexity.

All right, just to read a few of these notes.

Observable data and experiences vary from one person to another, we can be observing the same image, but each one of us would generate a different data collection.

If our purpose is to protect the self and keep things simple, then the reflective loop will close in which explains the tendency for dogma, conspiracy theories and cognitive walls.

Rather than cultural and personal meaning being added, it affects what data do I select and observe.

There are an infinite number of narratives that can logically, consistently weave together any finite set of facts.

what is not complexity that is a great question because i can't personally think of a non-complex system because each system is constituted of other systems components like atoms and electrons that i can our clicks and watches inform the algorithms to bring us more of that kind of content and more extreme versions of that content

some other comments too.

So how did we live and work in complexity this year?

For people who are joining, the Jamboard link is in the YouTube chat.

We'll be in this Jamboard for

some number of minutes more less than 30 then we'll head over to gather for michaela's session uh and sabine as co-facilitators on the ecotones so that was kind of a little early foray but it will be i think really cool to talk about it more in that facilitated session okay so people can go to slide four and

think about this, but let's read the sticky notes that are there now.

The natural state of thought.

Learn by doing.

Organic development.

Awesome.

And different symbols.

Of course, the answers to these questions could be

Not just words, but it's good to have something to read.

Also, it's another mode of communicating complexity, of course.

Something that we need time to formulate, comprehend, and explore.

Thanks.

That's very interesting.

Well, just while people are adding some things, I'll give one thought or framing on this.

As 2022 comes to a close, we can look back and think about how we learned and applied complexity in that year.

And to the extent things changed,

During this year, we're on a recent trajectory of change.

But in the areas where things didn't change this year, we're not changing in those ways, at least on a yearly scale.

I'll read a comment in the chat from Gary.

Digital systems can be really simple, finite and completely surveyable, independent of viewpoint or rather invariant.

Digital state is known.

Yeah, very interesting.

I'll just add to summarize that like just digital.

little bit of history that wasn't mentioned in the first part of this stream but is usually mentioned in the opening heartbeat streams is that the first complexity weekend event which was actually called complexity con for a kind of conference framing with that first event in downtown san francisco in 2019 co-organized with myself and sean and with many people who remain

in the community that means that during 2020 21 and now 22 we've had three digital years natural a system and then let's this um

just to expand it and then we can bring it back down so farming economic social environmental biological system economic system social system political system etc

something that isn't complex is something that could be analyzed understood by understanding a part of it and extrapolating yes interesting point so something uh in this framing

which could be connected to what was previously mentioned about digital systems being completely surveyable, independent of their viewpoint or rather invariant.

In the digital space, there can be reference that are either not possible or not utilized in in-person community and systems.

Does that make the system more or less complex?

If we have a phenomena that even through kind of slam dunk reductionism can be explained or heuristically extrapolated, does that make the phenomena more or less complex?

It's almost always something, just to kind of

again kind of open it up and return to how we are learning this year i'm personally fond of sean's insistence to always bring a particular and all that that accompanies like talking to people who are involved in that particular balancing that kind of discussion with also zooming out thinking about the bigger topics and also uh

perspective that complements that, that many have brought in their own ways, which is that there are

computational or formal or quantitative definitions of complexity such or logical that would enable discussion of complex systems or not complex or not very complex or more or less complex by this or that definition which sometimes align and sometimes don't

And then that whole domain of the mathematical and the formal complexity, complex systems, etc.

is complemented by a relational complexity where properties of the system of interest itself are either always

granted status as a complex system, or because of their relationship with an observer, that entire system can be said to be complex.

So people, for example, might point to a double pendulum as an example of a complex system and point to its chaotic behavior.

Whereas a single pendulum and that framework would be said to be like less complex or not a complex system.

But a person might still be able to focus on the single pendulum and that could be a complex scenario.

Learning is infinite, quite complex.

Yes, despite all of the above, I think we can say learning is complex.

What about complexity as a field and as a space?

We all probably were involved in different other online and in-person community

so some of those spaces and communities might be complexity or systems oriented other explicitly or implicitly others might not be but the construction of a double or single pendulum is relatively simple yes

Depends how deep down the construction rabbit hole we want to go.

Getting the wood or the metal.

Simple things can have very complex interactions and movements.

Totally agreed.

Nice point.

Thank you.

Post-it writer.

Is complexity...

more or less or differently relevant in 2022 and heading into 2023?

Is it being used more?

Is there a more salient position of complexity?

The English term itself?

And just more importantly, the gestalt and the underlying patterns of complexity while also balancing that it's not for any person or organization to be able to state in one language or another.

I'm just doing a quick Google Trends screenshot for complexity.

Others can do their own searches if they want.

Who knows what these patterns mean?

An understanding that complexity does not have to be complicated.

Oh, I see in the chat people writing semaphysy.

I'll add that to the jamboard.

And also I'll bring in

the blog post by Nora Bateson that discusses this term.

I'm just going to read the initial proposition from Nora Bateson's blog post.

I'll copy it in.

Someone wrote in the chat, mutual learning.

Yeah, basically.

Seems like that, but just to

read the first proposition sentences from norvaitzen's blog i would like to propose a new word for system that refers specifically to living systems that is to systems which emerge from the communications and interactions of living vitae another new term one which will be defined later

The new word and concept for system that I propose is one which highlights the expression and communication of interdependency and particularly mutual learning.

The existing word system, while useful for discussion of many kinds of systems, does not communicate contextual fields of simultaneous learning as is necessary for life.

And then the

Later section in that proposition says, I want to put the Greek prefix syn slash sym, meaning together, plus mathesi to learn.

So mathesi equals learning together.

Pronounced sym mathesi.

yeah thanks what on the same uh people can continue to add in their last few minutes like how will we learn and apply complexity in 2023

And which ways do we want to go?

At any scale.

Maybe somebody who's read a few books wants to join a live event or listen to a live stream, wants to join a live event.

Maybe somebody who has been to several online events and sees a potential in their local community wants to

coordinate some meetups or someone who's currently researching some area that they believe is relevant for complexity.

And maybe they want to be paid for their time or want to achieve some milestone in the work.

And to the Samantha C question.

So in the chat Benji wrote question, is it possible to not apply complexity?

Seems like every system is complex.

Yeah.

Or also, is there anything that can be simple?

I'll bring in a helpful image.

Of course, there's a million answers to these questions, but just to give one thought and reference relevant body of work, this is Dave Snowden's Kenevan quadrant space.

And so while some might see complexity or complex systems or systems exhibiting complexity

In different ways, this is one system that is being used in research and in application settings for some time.

It's some of the most professional work in complex systems.

And in this Kenevan framework, systems or engagements with systems can be at different spaces in the quadrants or in the center, confusion.

And so they have different imperatives

systems exhibiting different phenomena and constraints have different imperatives for for their engagement so there somebody might say the the previous uh name for clear might have been simple but i but it was updated to clear possibly i'm not sure if that's 100 correct um

So isn't, Michaela wrote in the chat, isn't simplicity the other side of complexity?

Yes.

And one will find the term used in a few different places.

I know of a few companies and email addresses and papers, simplexity.

Simple and complexity.

my perspective is however people want to see it and co-learn can be fine and great like just to kind of hyperbolize these distinctions which often are uh

extremely relevant and or salient or confusing to those who are just beginning their journeys in modern complexity um so just to kind of again to hyperbolize into like i don't know more of a joke form

We're at the complex systems conference and for one person there's a mathematical measure of complexity and so systems can be ranked on one scale as complex or not.

Somebody else has a very embodied and applied perspective and the relationality

is important for them.

Someone else is an avowed critic of the term complexity and they believe that another term like simplexity or simplicity or some other term is relevant.

All of these people have absolutely valid and important perspectives and a million more, of course.

However, that discussion

does not always generate or create outside of where it's intentional, a performant or inclusive and accessible space.

Hope that that's okay to say, but just sort of, and again, in this hyperbole slash joke form, these are all really important dimensions and

aspects and regimes of attention and action in global complexity communities again where the individual terms are going to be different because of people's differences in language and thinking and different people will be at different stages in their journey with learning and applying so that doesn't

mean that uh previous framings and distinctions are irrelevant it's the opposite they're highly relevant all right in the last four minutes does anyone else have any comments they want to make on slide four how will it be different in 2023

That could be how will our community be different?

How will complexity be different?

How will your engagement with complexity be different?

How will complexity be different around you?

more and more relevant people start to understand the importance of complexity together ecotone fluidic systems make complexity more accessible awesome great topic what might that look like or mean

Nice.

I know that icon.

We will use the website more as our communication platform.

Yeah.

Very grounded point made by the astute Jamboard Utilizer.

As we continue to develop our

technological capacity and system next solar cycle we will use the website more as our communication platform yes totally just uh we will be able to

send responsive emails of the type that people prefer.

We will be developing a chat structure so that people can contact each other so that the CW username becomes something that people can use within our namespace to effortlessly

register for events, get in feedback, step up to being on a committee or organize.

It'll be coming in stages as we explored a little bit earlier on.

And of course, no single voice on a live stream can say how it could or should happen.

So people should at the very least explore this tech work and committee

yes make complexity more accessible but what where from to where's complexity in in these systems what are people accessing why can't they access or don't they access

All right, just two more minutes.

Then we will go over to the Gather Atrium, which I'll put the link in the live chat.

But two minutes, any final comments that people want to make or any images they want to add.

Just one or two more minutes, just any final comments, because I know there's a short delay between when I say it and when you might hear it.

Accessibility is often about feeling welcome and feeling like they can navigate the community.

Thanks.

Great point.

well thanks to all the ways in which people have showed up in 2022 yes the calendar year the solar cycle there's many rhythms and cycles of gratitude and engagement we hope on our side on your side

Still, it makes sense just to look back at this year and really feel encouraged and positive about how we engaged and learned and applied complexity this year.

I just saw so many inspiring directions and teams and projects.

just within the very limited engagement of Complexity Weekend.

So thanks, everybody.

That'll be the end of the live stream.

Head over in the next few minutes to the Gather link in the calendar event or in the YouTube live chat.

Thanks.

See you later.