SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Hello, everyone.

Welcome to Synergetic's live stream.

This is Synergetic stream number 15.0, and it's March 13th, 2022.

Give me one second just to check that everything is working.

All right.

Awesome.

Well, welcome, everyone.

Today in Synergetics Livestream 15, the spirit for today is abduction, logistics, and regeneration.

Synergetics is participatory, so please leave comments, reach out,

give your thoughts, et cetera.

Today in 15, we're going to go over the key memes and themes and things to integrate as usual, and then we'll jump into some different text and multimedia readings.

First, we'll go over some trim tab reading group updates, and then go to Synergetics, Section 610, Triangulation, and Section 000, Humans in Universe.

So let's just start with some key memes and themes.

Synergetics, it's a relational multi-scale approach to systems thinking.

It's connected to our accessible experience, especially the physical experiences.

It doesn't have or use infinitesimals

infinitely small or infinitely large things, or points, lines, and planes, at least in the way that many are used to using them.

Synergetics frames design as an anticipatory cybernetic science, as a design science.

And tensegrity is kind of like the physical cousin or realization of synergetics, just in a way that's analogous to engineering's relationship with physics.

A big theme that we'll return to over and over is that space has a shape and it matters what shape it is.

If we want to be doing the right kind of design and structure can be seen as pattern and that patterning can have a static or a dynamic integrity.

Universe is the total scenario.

You don't need to say the universe because uni is right there.

It's just universe and any system.

that's a subsystem of universe is going to have a shape and tetrahedra is going to be the minimal shape 4d is a term that comes up also again and again whether it's bucky's book 4d time lock or whether there are other namespaces or usages of 4d just like kirby's slide down here shows that we can think about the coxeter 4d in terms of polytopes dimensions of math

We can think about the Einsteinian 4D in terms of space and time.

And we can think about the Fuller 4D in terms of 4D time lock and all of that.

Things to integrate, not too much has changed here.

I've added V-Zone, which is the design software for the V-Zone geometry.

And we've had some awesome sessions on that in the last few weeks and wanna be able to allocate enough time, but today is not that day.

let's jump right in with the trim tab updates so trim tab is a reading group and there's a mailing list and also a bi-weekly meeting and i thought it'd be fun just to highlight some of the awesome recent discussions and links just get a taste of some of the information that is happening in terms of contemporary synergetics so here is an email from noel coughlin from march 12 2022 so that's yesterday and noel wrote

I just wanted to share these formulas with people.

When the formulas are placed next to one another, we see the symmetrical mathematical process which universe uses to structure its polyhedrons.

The first number in each formula begins with the same number as that which was given by Bucky in Synergetics for the various polyhedron's volumes.

So here are the equations.

And tet has an implicit one coefficient.

So that's kind of the silent one right here.

But then we see that there's these numbers that are coefficients up in front.

In Synergetics 240, 10 to 18, Bucky talks about how there are six vectors or there are none.

For every point in universe, there are six uniquely and exclusively operating vectors.

And we talked about section 240, including that exact quote in Synergetic Stream number 8.0, probably last year.

I point this out because I was super excited when I saw that the symmetry within these formulas only shows itself when the vertex formulas are all set to be a divisor of six.

This offers some proof to Bucky's theorizing.

Each sphere or point complex is composed of six vectors.

With these formulas for the external layer of closest packed spheres like 10f squared plus 2, or 10f to the second power plus 2 because it doesn't have to be a square, and f is the frequency of a shape for the vector equilibrium, we find that 0 entered into the formula gives us 2.

Hence, we obtain the relation of 0 equals 2.

When we place 0 in the vertex formulas below, we obtain 1.

Herein, we obtain a relation of 0 equals 1.

So here's a question.

When does zero equal two?

When does zero equal one?

And when does zero equal zero?

I thought this was interesting because synergetics teaches us that universe is plural and at minimum two.

universe multiplies itself through division, and here we see that there are formulas which suggest that zero equals one equals two.

I'm still not sure if anyone else has discovered the formulas for the vector totals, but if you've ever heard anything about this, then feel free to let me know.

Here are the formulas for the total number of closest packed unit radius spheres or vertexes, along with the formulas for the total number of vectors or kissing points,

between these spheres along with their volumes.

Also see the follow-up emails from Noel and Kirby on this stream.

I'm sorry, on that thread.

Okay, give me one second to just see if I can fix the caption.

Otherwise, sometimes the captioning is a little bit finicky.

Okay.

Is it going to work?

All right.

Maybe no captions for the rest of the stream.

RIP to the captions.

So awesome, interesting formulas.

Let's keep going with our trim tap update review.

So here's an email that I wrote yesterday on March 12th, 2022.

So I wrote, hello, trim tap.

I was playing around with objects this morning and had a question for the group.

Is there any previous physical or metaphysical work in synergetics or tensegrity involving structural elements that serve a dual tension compression function?

The idea is that, and I'll just move my camera so that it's a little taking up more space here.

The idea is that below a certain length, the length of a metal straw, this would act as a compressive element and above a certain length, the length of the metal straw, this is a tension element.

So here's what it looks like.

So when it's pulled on from the ends, it's tension, but then when it's pressed, it's a compressive element.

So it's a spring inside of a straw and

If you connected something to the ends of the spring, it could be pulled on like it's a tension element, but it gets pressed on, it's a compressive element.

So this might play a few roles.

For example, mediating categorical phase transitions in structural properties.

Some module could be tuned to respond like a pure rigid object under compression and a pure tensile object under expansion.

And then here were some pictures I added.

So it's a set of springs that are linked together and threaded through a metal straw.

And here's the 1972 US half dollar for spatial comparison.

And also it's a nice 50 year throwback.

So Lionel wrote there, this would be a powerful extension of Fuller's thought.

A tensegrity could possibly oscillate with such members.

Let's color them blue and red.

Construct it so that blues are in compression and reds are in tension.

Then oscillate.

And in the final phase, blues are in tension and reds in compression.

The first challenge I see is that there is a third factor involved, not compression and not tension, but the phase change control.

Since each strut by definition can be in compression or tension, there is nothing keeping it locked in either one of those states.

They would likely be too elastic or flabby to participate in a classic tensegrity structure.

This phase control is a third factor that at the moment I cannot imagine how to implement it.

So, can you see how to implement it?

then alok luke singh wrote um and these are just sections taken from what these people have written this is not the full email but uh luke wrote my initial thoughts are that the concept of biotensegrity may be a benefit here in the simplest for the body in the biotensegrity model would be compression members are bones and tension members are connective tissues

which could be like muscle and fascia.

Okay, awesome.

Now the captioning is back.

Oh, so now you want to play?

Okay.

Well, we'll take what we can get with these variously open source and proprietary online affordances.

And then continuing on.

Muscle is contractile and at times it is helpful to think of the muscle and the fascia as an integrated whole.

There's a triphasic nature of muscle, eccentric, isometric, and concentric.

It would seem to me that we are searching for a middle phase, which for the muscles is isometric.

I colored it purple here for reference.

So this is just a little bit of fun and a cool idea.

So if you have any ideas about what may be a use for this type of dual tension compression element, or has somebody else made this type of model, it would be awesome to learn about.

And then just to give a third slightly longer dip into one of the trim tab updates.

Here's an email from Kirby Erner on March 8th, 22.

And Kirby is talking about the DSR, Design Science Revolution, in the Silicon Forest.

It's a progress report.

And so this is also just slightly shortened, but it's all what Kirby had written in an email.

And so Kirby wrote...

Also check out his YouTube channel, of course.

Kirby wrote, I continue to offer, one might say, as World Game exhibits, my teaching materials of recent vintage and current use, wherein core elements in synergetics join the mix of pre-college and college-level topics.

The curriculum is fairly seamless.

Some aspects.

So first, The School of Tomorrow.

A useful meme stemming from a useful movie rarely mentioned on this listserv, The House of Tomorrow, which was first a book.

And then here he's going to describe the plot.

Bucky fan grandma wants her ward, like the child she's taking care of, to be the next Bucky.

But he discovers punk music.

How will this resolve?

Tension.

Compression.

Synthesis.

My question.

What would the kids' curriculum be like then?

Were we to take the premise seriously?

The movie is only suggestive, leaving the question largely unexplored.

Let's go deeper to include the concentric hierarchy at least.

Second piece here, Martian math.

An excuse to dredge up science fiction as our most imaginative form of investment banking, wherein we hash out the pros and cons in our collective psyche of various scenarios well before the suits get to actually budgeting the numbers.

Big projects require planning and organizational machinery.

That's something we're gonna be talking about

later when we go to synergetics.

Quadric coordinates.

Very like XYZ, not any harder to use, especially when developed for interactive use and demonstrating tip-to-tail vector addition, scalar multiplication, and 180 degree inversion.

Just like their Gibbsian counterparts.

A doorway into an alternative paradigm as it grows to encompass the synergetic volumes, i.e.

the tetravolume concept.

GST, general systems theory.

there from the beginning, and hinted at here and there in Fuller's corpus.

He wasn't copying or directly extending the GST of his contemporaries, he's clear about that.

Kirby Arner's first writing to Bucky was regarding the GST stuff, made in Egypt.

He was fresh from Cairo.

Interesting travels.

I'm not claiming the GST stuff is part of anything but my asynchronous Heuristics for Teachers, the online YouTube episodes, hyperlinked but not so linear.

The School of Tomorrow repository is also actually one step removed from Elite School, which I'm currently developing.

I've got some quadras going at the 8th grade level among some of the gifted.

The important thing is there is nothing in the academic world that's stopping the DSR, Design Science Revolution, from phasing in at least some of the core elements of American Transcendentalism, or nothing serious, meaning the Bucky stuff.

Stereotypes, maybe.

So stereotypes about what Bucky is or about this area of study, this regime of attention.

There's this sense that if the textbook companies haven't done it, that's because it cannot be done.

Having worked in a textbook company, I can attest that inertia and pre-existing capital go a long way towards explaining our slowness to change, especially when it comes to repackaging disciplines with a reputation for remaining unchanged, such as high school math.

But we know it happens.

From time to time, something shifts.

Kirby.

So just to give a tiny deeper look into some of these links that Kirby is always mentioning,

Here's from the GitHub repo of 4D Solutions School of Tomorrow.

So just a few screenshots and little snippets.

So these are some of the topics that are addressed in the School of Tomorrow.

So the topics include the concentric hierarchy, which is shown here.

Martian math, computer program, scheduling, that's also related to logistics.

Wow, the captions.

They come and they go, you know?

You gotta respect them while they're there, but you can't rely on them when they're not.

Other topics, though, for School of Tomorrow, 3D graphics, data science and data visualization, history, literature, cryptography, virology, number theory, group theory, number sequences, nuclear isotopes, arithmetic in bases other than 10 in the philosophy of engineering.

So what is the School of Tomorrow?

What distinguishes a School of Tomorrow affiliate is a focus on some shared focal points, one of which is the concentric hierarchy of polygons with their tetravolumes.

And also, I thought it was kind of cool to look at the history, some of the lessons that are emphasized here, including science fiction through the ages, the Bonus Army, which were World War I veterans requesting payment from Congress, Smedley, Fighting Quaker Butler,

Rajneesh Puram, The Vortex Festival, The Browser Wars and The Birth of JavaScript, Occupy Portland and The Hoovervilles, Refugees and Asylum Seekers in Portland, Cyberpunk and Cryptopunk Subcultures, and other topics you choose.

So it's a mix of place-based education, which is authentic to where Kirby is in the Pacific Northwest, as well as some of these...

more general topics.

And as always, it comes along with cool interactive notebooks, interesting information about the volume of shapes.

Why does it matter that their shapes volumes are that way?

Come find out.

What does that mean?

Come find out.

And then just to show the elite school, the Quadres repo.

So what is a Quadre?

Kirby writes, imagine standing at the center of a sphere with 12 equally sized spheres all around you.

You're basically in the center of a vector equilibrium at the corners of a cuboctahedron.

So if you close pack the spheres, then you're at the center

of a packing where the corners of the midpoints of those other spheres make a cuboctahedron.

Every time you step in a random neighboring sphere, you're in the same circumstance of having the choice of 12 next door neighbors.

So that's being described by a random walk in this lattice.

Have you seen random walks on chess or checkerboards?

Just take the checker pattern and extend it indefinitely around an arbitrary square marked with a lamppost.

And so this is the quadray.

We're going to move in 4D.

And so that's why there's four numbers that describe each point.

Yes, each of them could be reflected with a coordinate in three dimensions with XYZ or in radial coordinates, but this is going to be represented in quadrays.

And so to make our pathway through the CCP, which is the name of this sphere packing pattern, easy to compute and keep track of, we're going to want to label all the spheres with vectorial coordinates.

We will find it convenient to do so using quadrays, an interface bolted on XYZ and easy to reason about independently of XYZ.

In the game of vectors, the origin sphere will be labeled 0000, and the 12 around it will be the unique permutations of 2110.

Each time a random walker takes a step, they have one of 12 vectors to choose from.

Adding that vector to their current position takes them to a next position and so on along a pathway.

So pretty cool operational coordinate systems.

How is it related to the very interesting geometry that we learn in synergetics?

How is it related to volume computation from Euler, Euler, and Gerald de Jong, GDG, GDJ?

How is this related to some work that Kirby has presented elsewhere?

So just to give a few pieces on just some of the stuff that we learned about by hanging out on trim tab and just paying attention to what our colleagues are telling us day to day.

All right, well, that's the trim tab update.

And now we're going to move forward into Synergetics section 610 called triangulation.

So this is gonna be a shorter section and then the following one will be a bit longer.

So Synergetics 610, triangulation part one.

By structure, we mean a self-stabilizing pattern.

The triangle is the only self-stabilizing polygon.

By structure, we mean omni-triangulated.

The triangle is the only structure.

Unless it is self-regeneratively stabilized, it is not a structure.

So I'm going to take, I'm going to make my video a little larger so you can see it at least partially.

Okay, so we're going to take that tension compression straw that I was playing with earlier and pull out the springs.

So here's four smaller springs that are attached.

And so this is called a necklace.

And if you just hold the necklace and you make a square with four, it's going to be floppy.

However, a triangle, if you hold that last piece, it's resilient.

So that is how triangle is the basis of all structure.

In fact, Bucky takes it to quite an extreme level when he says the triangle is the only structure.

And this is something that even people who work with the XYZ, sort of square, quadrilateral, the cube world,

They use cross bracing and implicitly or explicitly, even there in the rectilinear houses that we have, triangulation is still the basis of structure.

So if you have a necklace and you make it into a triangle, you get a stable polygon, you get a stable shape, you get pattern.

Whereas every other possible necklace is going to be droopy.

Section three.

Everything that you have ever recognized in universe as a pattern is re-cognited as the same pattern you have seen before.

Because only the triangle persists as a constant pattern, any recognized patterns are inherently recognizable only by virtue of their triangularly structured pattern integrities.

Recognition is as dependent on triangulation as is original cognition.

Only triangularly structured patterns are regenerative patterns.

Triangular structuring is a pattern integrity itself.

This is what we mean by structure.

So what is triangulation?

And let's look at figure 609.01, instability of polyhedra from polygons of more than three sides before we continue.

So here is showing how the triangle is stable.

The tetrahedron is also stable because it's omni-triangulated.

Omni means all, and so the triangular

coordination of every single side of the tetrahedra renders it stable and so that's why it's possible i'll make myself bigger again here's my spring tetrahedra like a spring chicken but this is also not droopy this is a resilient shape because it's an omni-triangulated shape however in contrast maybe you

the square, the pentagon, the hexagon, et cetera, becomes droopy and other shapes that are not omni-triangulated become very droopy.

So what is triangulation and why is it the basis of structural integrity?

What is the difference between a pattern integrity and a structural integrity?

We'll talk to that in a second.

What about zooming in and out, about tuning in and out, a different regime of attention, starting with universe and then zooming in by discarding relevancies?

So how do we find the triangles that constitute this recognizable basis of structure?

What's the relationship between the structure we observe and the structure out there in the world?

And how is this minimal basis of structural integrity related to what in active inference or in the free energy principle we talk about as particular entities or autonomous states?

So 6.10, triangulation is structure and vice versa.

610.10, structural functions.

11, triangulation is fundamental to structure, but it takes a plurality of positive and negative behaviors to make a structure.

For example, always and only coexisting push and pull, compression and tension.

Always and only coexisting concave and convex.

Always and only coexisting angles and edges.

Always and only coexisting torque and counter torque.

Always and only coexisting insideness and outsideness.

Always and only coexisting axial rotation pulse.

Always and only coexisting conceptuality and non-conceptuality.

Always and only coexisting temporal experience and eternal conceptuality.

12.

If we want to have a structure, well, first let's just take a thought on 11.

And of course, just like every other section in these videos, you know, pause it, leave a comment, let me know what you think, do it in public, do it in private.

This is just a call for participation and for engagement and attention to synergetics and beyond. 12.

What is being aimed towards in 11 is to give some of these, giving a plurality, each of the lines are constituting a plurality, and more could be added, of these complementary positive and negative behaviors, which we'll talk more about in a second.

If we want to have a structure, we have to have triangles.

To have a structural system requires a minimum of four triangles.

That's the tip.

The tetrahedron is the simplest structure.

So we were just talking about triangle as the basis of structural integrity and of structure itself.

So why not say the triangle is the simplest structure or the line is the simplest structure or the point is the simplest structure?

Well, this kind of returns to our key memes and themes about how in synergetics, points, lines, and planes don't exist or are not used in the same way that we might be used to from a non-synergetics education.

The point, line, and plane, despite the Kandinsky book, actually only exist in conceptuality.

Maybe Kandinsky would be fine with that claim.

And it isn't until we have space enclosure that we have actual spatial existence.

And so the tetrahedron is the minimum system, the simplest structure, because it's the minimum space enclosing system.

And it contains four vertexes, four vertices that can be thought of as energy events, as well as all of those six edges that reflect the relationship between those energetic events.

We could have something that,

for all conversational intents and purposes, looks like a triangle.

Like if we were to have three pieces of railroad track and we welded them into a triangle.

So that could be said just conversationally to be a triangle or to approximate triangular geometry.

But of course, if we zoomed in, we would find the close packing of atomic structures.

And that is what would be granting that triangular structure at the macro level

inability to actually have pattern integrity, structural integrity.


UNKNOWN:
13.


SPEAKER_00:
Every triangle has two faces, obverse and reverse.

Every structural system has omni-intertriangulated division of universe into insideness and outsideness.

And so this is where Tet as structural minimal system comes into play because it is partitioning

universe into inside the system, the system of interest, the regime of attention, what is being tuned into from what is outside of the system.

Once there is enclosure of space, there's insideness and outsideness.

With just a flat triangle or a line or a point, there is no insideness or outsideness.

It isn't a thing in terms of active inference.

So just a few questions.

You know, think about them, leave a comment, let me know.

What does it mean for triangulation to be fundamental to structure?

Why does it entail a plurality of positive and negative behaviors to make a structure?

So what is this?

What are these set of dualities?

Are there more?

What would they be?

How would we know?

What is it about these different dualities that come into being that are co-instantiated?

What is structure?

What is function?

What is process?

What is pattern?

What is integrity?

Where does the physical and metaphysical come into play here?

Is tensegrity about the physical and synergetics is about the metaphysical?

Just to close out this section, we can turn, as we sometimes do, to William Blake.

And so here on the left side is the third page of William Blake's work, The Marriage of Heaven and Hell.

And some of the parts that are written starting right there in the middle of the page.

Without contraries is no progression.

Attraction and repulsion, reason and energy, love and hate are necessary to human existence.

From these contraries spring what the religious call good and evil.

Good is the passive that obeys reason.

Evil is the active springing from energy.

And then another Blake section, selection, from Milton, book the second, on the right side here is the page.

Now written backwards, right there in the center, it says, Contraries are positives.

A negation is not a contrary.

So that's the part that it looks like.

You can see the backwards text here.

What are contraries and negations in synergetics?

So convex and concave, which are they?

They're contraries.

I hope it's okay to say that.

They're contraries because they positively, always and only, are coexisting and interaccommodating, or Bucky might say something like that.

they're not negating each other concaveness and convexness concavity and convexity do not negate each other they're contrary they're complementary to each other but they do not negate each other and that is also other blake sections like contraries exist and negations exist not and all of that

And just one interesting note is due to the method that Blake used to create these images, it would often require that for something to be printed looking forward, so it could be read like normal text, it had to be inscribed backwards and then flipped through the method of printing, which he called the infernal method.

And so it's like that part that looks like it's backwards

he wrote forwards and all of this part was written in backwards script on the print and then printed so that it was forward.

So a lot of playing with positives and negatives and forwards and backwards, contraries, negations, and a lot of interesting areas to look into with respect to Blake, as well as to classical philosophy.

in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy and many, many other places.

So just a short section on triangulation and the key memes and takeaways here, the things that you can just have at your layer one, have at your disposal, be ready to just bring up every time you hear structure or integrity or triangle is that triangle is structural basis of everything.

and also yes and we have these complementary relationships which transposing from the synergetics ontology into the blakian ontology we can talk about in terms of being contraries rather than negations okay

last section for today which might be a slightly longer section is going to be the early section of synergetics humans in universe

So this is section triple zero dot 100.

And the text just says introduction to the 10 color posters.

And so I grabbed the posters and I'll just sort of expand each one just so we can take a look at it, you know, document it, take screenshots, et cetera.

So here's poster one.

Simplest trigonometric solutions.

Here's poster two.

Conceptuality of trigonometric functions of angle A as expounded in synergetics.

So here's the classical function sine, cosine, tangent, cotangent, secant, cosecant being related to this spherical geometry.

It's kind of like the unit circle, except we're taking it seriously this time.

Here's the third poster, plate number three.

This is multiplication only by division.

Three ways of progressive halving, starting from primitive unity or tetrahedron.

So here's a two frequency tet with two tets.

And then here's how it's divided to get to this shape.

And then how that can be continued to be broken down and so on.

Poster four.

this says the deceptiveness of topology quanta lost by congruence so this is kind of like a jitterbug from the most compacted tet in g to the most expanded cuboctahedron vector equilibrium in a here is

plate five synergetics operational accountability of all vanishing and elsewhere reappearing quanta here's six now you see it now you don't Quanta lost by pre precession the Richter transformation

you see it now you don't but here's number seven but there it is again quantum recovered in the cube quantum recovered in the vector equilibrium not for today and i'd love to learn more about it but just not ready to talk about that yet number eight

four quanta phases, gravity more effective than radiation, in spite of identical vectorial energy potential, and because of single-linked disintegrative patterning versus double-linked integrative patterning.

So here's that tet, and here are the different edges that are colored differently, and these are going to be the, this says tuned out as radiation,

And this says tuned in as matter.

And this is one quantum of energy equals the six vector symmetry.

Kind of what Noel was talking about just earlier in this discussion.

So we take that six vectors and that's the minimal system.

And then just nine and 10.

So here's nine, very beautiful image.

Cosmic hierarchy.

of omni inter rationally phased nuclear centered convergently divergingly

convergently divergently intertransformable systems and then their volumes are presented there and so they're nuclear centered they all share the same nuclear point and then they're intertransformable through these interoperabilities and then there's all of these amazing overlays and ways that we can explore the different edge and positions and then just the last one which is kind of a more of a subtle poster

It says radiant photons.

Pretty beautiful.

All right, so that was just a quick little break to start section triple O, humans and universe.

And now there's going to be a fair amount of just reading and listening and thinking.

It's going to be a narrative, hashtag narrative information management of humans in universe or humans in the world as systems, spaceship earth.

So here we go. 101.

The combined land areas of Africa, Europe, and Asia embrace within their perimeters the Mediterranean, Black, Caspian, Aral, China, Arabian Red, Baltic, and North Seas, although their area was historically thought of only as a flat universe sandwiched between heaven above and hell below and seemingly stretching away to infinity in all lateral directions.

Yet.

The total land area of this flat world constitutes less than 17% of the subsequently discovered to be spherical planet Earth's surface.

All the great empires of written history before AD 1500 lay well within that known flat world.

It was and as yet remains the spontaneous theater of popular historical conceptioning.

So it's kind of the old world.

It's where we came from.

It's that narrative.

Whether we draw a bigger red circle or whether some people have a slightly smaller red circle, the point is it's a smaller piece of our whole planet.


UNKNOWN:
102.


SPEAKER_00:
How did this pervading historical concept become outdated?

What changed the terrestrial conceptioning adopted by the leaders of the world's power structures?

That's one of the questions we're going to be exploring. 103.

When the archaeologist's artifact-proven history of mathematics opens 4,000 years ago in Babylon and Mesopotamia, it is already a very sophisticated science.

Mathematics may well have had its beginnings much earlier, in India or Indochina, as it is an art and science that has traveled consistently westward.

Over 3,000 years ago, the Greeks made further magnificent contributions to geometry, algebra, and calculation.

Then about 2,000 years ago, the Roman Empire all but obliterated mathematics.

A little more than 1,000 years ago, Arabs and Hindus traveling through North Africa began to restore some of the ancient mathematics to the westward evolving culture.

When all...

Quaresmi, original 8800 treatise on algebra, was republished in Latin in Carthage in 1200.

It required a further 200 years for his elucidation of the function of zero, the cipher, to be diffused into the university systems of Europe.

So...

Classical Bucky-isms, I'm just reading it out verbatim.

Is it true?

Do you have more information?

Do you have better information?

Different information?

Is this accurate?

Would be great to know.


UNKNOWN:
104.


SPEAKER_00:
The cipher made possible the positioning of numbers, which in turn facilitated division and multiplication.

Imagine trying to multiply or divide with Roman numerals.

Impossible.

the Renaissance began with the new calculating facility introduced by the cipher.

The cipher was not only an essential tool in the work of Copernicus, Kepler, Galileo, and Newton, but it also brought about Columbus's revised concepts of terrestrial navigation.

It went on to instrument the mechanical and leveraged calculation capabilities of Leonardo, Leonardo da Vinci.

And in the art of ship design, the cipher gave birth to structural and mechanical engineering, which made possible the intertensioning and compressioning calculations of the ribbed structural strength of a sailing vessel, as well as that of its vast wind energy driven complex of compression and tension spars, sails, and rigging, replacing the trial and error guesswork that had previously been used in naval and land architecture.

This capability in mathematical multiplication and division opened up a whole new field of safely anticipated structural engineering and navigation.

Wow, awesome section here.

So anticipated structural engineering and navigation.

This connects trim tab navigation to the cybernetic anticipatory design science revolution, which is the anticipation of structural needs and the engineering for those needs.

And then Bucky connects this to the introduction of the cipher and the increased uptake of the cipher, which facilitates calculations that previously would have been challenging.

So new kinds of calculations were possible because there was a movement from one number representation system to another number representation system.

So whether you're writing it in so-called Roman numerals or

using the base 10 with a cipher with a zero if you have two people and each want two oranges you still have four oranges that you need so we're still talking about the same territory in a sense but we're using different maps to navigate in that metaphysical territory and so that's why not to get too directly to what we talked about earlier or in every single stream

we're looking for a way to move from the XYZ paradigm into the synergetic paradigm.

And so there'll be things that would be like using Roman numerals for in the XYZ that we'll be able to do fluently in the synergetics paradigm as if it was the cipher.

So it's not going to be exactly the same because this is about numbers and synergetics is vectorial geometry, but it's really tantalizing and already has borne fruit that there are problems that we can reconceptualize in the synergetic paradigm that give us a new edge as opposed to doing the XYZ 90 degree rectilinear world.

So let's turn to the 105 and think about logistics and planning and all those other things that we were talking about.


UNKNOWN:
105.


SPEAKER_00:
This new anticipatory science made large engineering projects possible.

it became known to and then was employed by only the world's richest schemers monarchs nations and pirate enterprisers no others could afford to buy great ships with more powerfully engineered ships humans emerged westward through gibraltar to explore the atlantic to sail around africa to reach the orient and the pacific by water and to circumnavigate the globe

Thus it became public knowledge that the old open-edged infinite world system had closed back on itself in all circumferential directions to become a finite system, a closed sphere.

The monarchs and merchants realized that within the closed system, whoever commanded the line of most efficient high seas supplies would become the masters of world wealth.

Ships could carry cargoes that overland caravans could not.

So, continuing to 106, then we'll give a comment.


UNKNOWN:
106.


SPEAKER_00:
In 1600, the East India Company was founded as a private enterprise by Queen Elizabeth and a small group of her intimates.

The limited legal liability of their enterprise was granted by royal decree, and its projects were thereafter militarily sustained and protected by Great Britain's Royal Navy and colonial troops.

In England, the East India Company College was established to train the officers of the enterprise for their worldwide deployment.

That college and its handsome campus are still in operation as of 1979.

The British Empire became the first in history of which it could be said that the sun never set.

Famous quote.

These last two sections, to learn more about Bucky's perspective and about the history and the narrative here, you might want to check out his work, Grunch of Giants, because it relates to how the entry cost of naval engineering and the opportunity

of controlling the highways and the byways moved from overland caravanning to oversea caravanning.

And then due to piracy in multiple ways, it moved into the financial sector where don't we still talk about currency and above water and underwater and how liquidity gets frozen and all of that?

107, as professor of economics at East India Company College in 1810,

Thomas Malthus became the first economic authority ever to receive, in toto, the vital statistics of a world-embracing spherical empire.

At the very end of the 18th century, Malthus published his documented thesis that humanity was multiplying its numbers at a geometric exponential rate of gain while increasing life support production at only an arithmetic or linear rate of gain.

And since the Earth is a finite closed system sphere, it apparently became scientifically manifest that there is a fundamental inadequacy of life support on our planet.

Until then, all opinions on such matters had been pure guesses.

So this is what is sometimes called Malthusian economics or Malthusian analysis.

And kind of the classic curve is that you have some constant or constantly increasing amount of support that can be provided.

And then you have some exponentially growing need, like number of people.

And the idea is that eventually the exponential is going to outpace the linear, whether it's flat or even increasing a lot, such that there will not be enough for everyone.

That's Malthusian.

108.

A third of a century after Malthus, Charles Darwin attributed biological evolution to survival of only the fittest species and individuals within species.

Though he denied there was any economic significance in his theory of evolution, the economists insisted that superior physical fitness obviously governed economic survival as well.

Karl Marx accepted the scientific viewpoints of both Malthus and Darwin when he declared in effect that the working class is the fittest to survive.

They know how to use the tools and to cultivate the fields.

The wealthy are parasites.

This inaugurated the supranational concept of two worldwide political classes and two competing theories of political organization.

So, Bucky and biology, it's a topic for another day.

I'm an evolutionary biologist, and so sometimes the way that Bucky glides over what Darwin did or didn't say or how evolution is or isn't meant to be interpreted is

It leaves some room for improvement, but that's what we're doing here and now.

Or sphere and now, as Stroopy might say.

We're able to read what Bucky wrote verbatim and have our own perspectives and takes.

So as with everything else that comes up, if you disagree and you have a reason or not, just...

Express it.

Be active in your synergetics education, and there's no need to take what any person says, any of these names listed here, or Bucky, or anyone, as giving just simply the true information.

It's always a perspective.

And a linear projection down into rhetoric and symbolic strings.


UNKNOWN:
109.


SPEAKER_00:
As a consequence of the discoveries of Malthus and Darwin,

All the great political ideologies have since adopted a prime philosophy that says, you may not like our political system, but we are convinced that we have the fairest, most logical and ingenious method of coping with the inherent inadequacy of terrestrial life support.

But since there are others who disagree diametrically about the best method of coping, it can be determined only by force of arms which system is the fittest to survive.

Thus, survival of the physically fittest became the basis for national departments of defense with their priority of access to the most advanced science and technology.

The military took command of all the highest performance materials, brains, instruments, and tools of production. 110.

Mutually assured, sorry, 110.

Mutually assumed survival only of the fittest is the reason why the United States and the USSR have for the past 30 years appropriated $200 billion annually to buy ever more effective weapons of potential destruction.

The great political and industrial power structures have all become supranational comprehensivists, while the people have been passport chained to their respective 150 national preserves.

The people have become educationally divided into specialists for exploitation by the supranational powers who divide to conquer and divide to keep conquered.

a little bit of a different twist on the multiplication only by division.

This touches upon a theme that, again, is expanded upon in The Grunch of Giants and elsewhere, which is a combination of a few themes and memes.

So one is that

due to the perceived or actual struggle for survival and adversarial nature of the geopolitical operating environment quote all of the highest performance materials brains instruments and tools of production go to where they go to the national departments of defense then bucky takes it into the specific case of the um at the time of writing in the 1980s

the expenditures and some of the tensions and the number of countries that existed, and then connects that fragmentation of the crew of Spaceship Earth, that's us, into countries that are perceived to have adversarial interest, and relates that to the way that in education, there's division into specialists.

And specialists, Bucky's suggesting, can be exploited by the powers that be, by the grunge,

in a way that comprehensivists are not exploitable or are not exploited.

Up until the 20th century, reality consisted of everything that humans could see, smell, touch, and hear.

Then, at the entry into the 20th century, the electron was discovered, a century after the time of Malthus.

Much of the science became invisible with the introduction of an era of electronics, electromagnetics, and atomics.

These invisible micro and macro exploring cosmic instruments provided for rearrangements of atomic interpositioning, whose metallic alloying and chemical structuring produces ever more powerful and incisive performances per pound of physical matter employed.

One question.

Up until the 20th century, for who, for whom, reality consisted of...

Everything that humans could see, smell, touch, and hear.

So let's just say that that is a shorthand for sensory reality or sensory perception, observations, observed states, as we'd say in active inference.

Where's imagination?

Where is conceptuality?

Wasn't there conceptuality before the 20th century?

And then if we're going to say that something changed,

Don't we also learn about electrons through our observations and sensory modalities?

So not exactly sure about this, but c'est la vie.

And now we're going to jump into talking more about the per pound performance of physical matter.

But first,

There's a quick intermission from historical narrative to talk about structure, gravity, and tension and compression.


UNKNOWN:
112.


SPEAKER_00:
112.

Structures are complexes of visible or invisible physical events interacting to produce stable patterns.

A structural system divides the universe into all universe outside the structural system, macrocosm, and all universe inside the structural system, microcosm.

Newton's discovery of mass interattraction showed that the interattraction forces of atoms, planets, stars, or galaxies increases exponentially as the interdistances decrease arithmetically, and vice versa.

Have the distance, have the interdistance, and make fourfold the interattractive integrity of the remotely bodied structural system.

That is the law of gravity.

Symmetric?

Symmetrical non-contacting concentric interpositioning of already symmetrical arrays of atoms produces exponentially increased interatomic coherence of materials.

The section in green is tetrahedra as minimal system, the minimal space enclosing system, separating universe into the microcosm, the system of interest, the regime of attention, the target system, and macrocosm, the niche, everything else except for the target system.

And of course, systems can consist of nested systems.

That's high frequency and nested.

113, gravity is the inwardly cohering force acting integratively on all systems.

Radiation is the outwardly disintegrating force acting divisively upon all systems.

So tension and compression, radiation and gravity, complementaries, contraries.

They're not negations.

They don't negate each other.

They coexist.

That's tensegrity, tension and compression, gravity and radiation.

114.

All structural systems are comprised of tension and compression components.

Stone masonry has a high compression resisting strength of 50,000 pounds per square inch ultimate, but masonry has low tensional coherence.

It can withstand only 50 pounds per square inch tensing.

Stone age derived masonry is a thousand times more effective in its resistance to compression than to tension.

So this is saying if you have a brick wall and you have mortar and masonry, however that is defined here,

It can resist 50,000 pounds per square inch getting pressed down.

However, if you were to kind of expand it and have tension, it is actually quite weak.

It only has 50 pounds per square inch.

But whatever the values are and whether we evaluate them as strong or weak, the point is that there's a ratio that favors compression by 1,000 to 1.

115.

Throughout the three million known years of the Stone Age, humans relied on gravity to hold their vertical stone walls together until, as it often happened, they were shaken apart by earthquakes, against which they had almost no tensionally-cohering resistance.

Gravity pushed humanity's stone structures inwards towards the Earth's center.

Humans had to build their structures on bedrock shoes to prevent them from sinking vertically into Earth's center.

stone buildings could not float on water but nature had invented low weight wood of high self-cohering tensile strength averaging approximately 10 000 pounds per square inch and of relatively low compression resistive capability also approximately 10 000 pounds per square inch wood floated on water and could move useful loads horizontally wood made good rafts for transporting humans but not for floating heavy cargos

Thus, the high tensile strength of wood, combined with the human discovery of the intertrussing principles of structuring and the low overall displacement weights involved, made possible for humans to design and fabricate air-enclosing wooden vessels whose structure and space enclosure combined to produce highly successful wooden vessels of the sea that could carry great cargoes.

So a few things.

First off,

3 million known years of the Stone Age, humans relied on gravity to hold their vertical stone walls together.

What about the diverse architectural styles that have been observed around the world?

Do they all use stone?

I don't think so.

talking about wood, 10,000 pounds per square inch of both tension and compression.

So wood under compression is only one fifth as strong as masonry, like if it were a beam in a building that was getting compressed.

However, wood is much stronger in terms of its tensile strength than masonry.

And then Bucky points out how the raft,

is useful for moving things horizontally, but a raft, just like a flat piece of wood, is not great for floating heavy cargo.

And so the insight was to fabricate air-enclosing wooden vessels whose structure and space enclosure combine to produce highly successful wooden vessels.

So, also known as a boat. 116.

In the 1850s, humans arrived at the mass production of steel, an alloy of iron, carbon, and manganese, having a tensile strength of 50,000 pounds per square inch, as well as a compression-resisting capability of 50,000 pounds per square inch.

Steel has the same compression-resistance capability as masonry, but it also has a thousand times greater tensile capability than masonry.

and five times the tensile or compressive strength of wood.

Steel brought mankind a structural tension capability to match stone's previous millions of years of exclusive compressional supremacy.

With far higher tensile strength per weight than wood, steel made possible ever more powerful watertight air-containing vessels than did wood, even though steel by itself does not float.

So, cool.

If a piece of metal doesn't float, why does a boat?

It has to do with the air enclosure and also this approach of very quantitative and tension and compression oriented way of looking at materials development of humanity and then connecting who had the advantage and the utility of different materials and design science processes and how those advantages were deployed in the context of informational and strategic

asymmetries and how that guides the time evolution of the human group.

Very classical Bucky take.


UNKNOWN:
117.


SPEAKER_00:
The technology of metallurgy began developing metal alloys of ever higher strength to weight ratio.

Out of this came aluminum production by the opening of the 20th century and aluminum alloys and stainless steel by the 1930s.

These new materials made it possible to design and build engine powered all metal airplanes, structural vessels, which could pull themselves angularly above the horizontal and ever more steeply aloft.

With the advent of successively higher strength to weight ratios of metal alloys and glass reinforced plastic materials, ever more heavily laden airplanes were designed, which could climb ever more steeply and faster.

Finally, humans developed so much strength per weight of materials capability that they accomplished vertol jet plane flight and vertical space vehicle blastoffs.

Since then, humans developing ever greater strength per weight of material have gone on to carry ever greater useful loads in vertical takeoff vehicles at ever more accelerated rates of ascent.

So Vertol is kind of like a contraction of vertical takeoff and landing, aka kind of like a helicopter.

But also if you look up Vertol, you'll see it's a specific type of vehicle.

One interesting area of exploration might be to connect what Bucky is exploring with metallurgy to alchemy.

And...

One other interesting note is that previously a boat could only pull itself angularly horizontally.

And then with a plane or any other kind of flying vehicle, you have the ability to not just taxi, but also to take off.

And so that's flight, is when all of a sudden the vehicle is able to change its elevation. 118.

As of the 1970s, the human mind has developed a practical tensile structuring capability of 600,000 pounds per square inch.

The means of accomplishing this new and overwhelming structural strength has become entirely invisible.

Fully 99% of humanity has as yet no idea that this increase in tensile capability has come about, or how it came about, or why it works.

While humans cannot see the ever lessening inter atomic proximity of atoms and electrons of electromagnetic events, they can witness the ever more vertical takeoff angle capabilities manifesting human comprehension of the fundamental structuring principles and their military developments and profitable commercial usage.

But only vast money investments or vast governments can afford to exploit the increased technical advantages.

so where are we at today in hashtag 2022 what is our tensional tensional capacity what is our a tensional capacity reducing the inter-atomic proximity of materials through alloying

produces materials with higher tensile strength.

And so that has become invisible because we could differentiate wood from metal, but alloys of metal are difficult to understand their differences, and they also have very nonlinear properties.

But we are indeed in a time of materials development. 119.

Before the airplane, humans said, you cannot lift yourself by your bootstraps.

Today we are lifting ever lighter and stronger structural vessel selves by our ever less effort of our scientific know-how bootstraps.

No economist knows this.

It is the most highly classified of military and private enterprise secrets.

Industry now converts the ever increasing work capacity per pound of materials invested primarily to yield monetary profits for the government subsidized private enterprise producers of weapons.

So there's a lot here.

Bucky is all about doing more with less.

Less weight, higher tension.

Or less fertilizer, more regenerative agriculture.

Doing more with less.

We're flying high, we're doing it live, we're doing more with less.

However, in the context of that adversarial grunge scenario that we've been talking about, that Malthusian paradigm,

and adversarial paradigm, it's like a win-lose or even a lose-lose paradigm rather than a win-win green pill, the knowledge about how to do more with less can basically go two different ways.

Bucky says, it is the most highly classified of military and private enterprise secrets.

So in other words, doing more with less gets co-opted into either two different channels.

Either it involves winning warfare better with less or making more profit with less capital.

Military-industrial complex.

Doing more with less.

Win-lose.

Who loses?

Who wins? 120.

now in the 1970s even though here i am 50 years later we can stay in indisputable proposition of abundance of which the world power structures do not yet have dawning awareness we can state that as a consequence of the myriad of more with less invisible technological advances of the 20th century and employing only well-proven technologies and already mined and ever more copiously recirculating materials

It is now technically feasible to retool and redirect world industry in such a manner that within 10 years, we can have all of humanity enjoying a sustainably higher standard of living with vastly increased degrees of freedom than has ever been enjoyed by anyone in all of history.

So a few different points here.

First, we have doing more with less.

We have invisible technological advances.

We have not discovering more minds anymore.

but recirculating materials through recycling.

So there was one calculation, I don't know what book Bucky did it in, where he calculated the cost of opening a new mine and the enrichment of the ore for copper or aluminum in comparison with going to a so-called landfill and extracting the metals from there.

And the landfill has a higher density of those metals than the ore does.

So why do we build more mines?

And then this section in red.

Of course, it didn't happen that way specifically, that we did manage to pivot from weaponry to livingry.

And some days it doesn't feel like we're doing it now either, but maybe we're still on the critical path and Bucky was being optimistic or motivational with 10.

And I just hope that we are on that critical path indeed.

121.

During this 10-year period, we can also phase out all further use of fossil fuels and atomic energy, since the retooled world industry and individual energy needs will have become completely supplied by our combined harvests of electromagnetic, photosynthetic, chemical, and biological products of the daily energy income initially produced by sun and gravity.

Industry, retooled from weapons production to living reproduction, will rehouse the deployed phases of world humans by single family, air deliverable, energy harvesting, only rentable dwelling machines.

When humans are convergent, they will dwell in domed over moon crater cities that will be energy harvesting and exporting centers rather than energy sinkholes.

awesome regenerative vision that human as local sense maker would forage harvest and export energy we could like be a source of light and energy rather than being a sink of light and energy

This point about only rentable is pretty interesting.

It's kind of like you'll own nothing and be happy, but make it Bucky.

And then this is the classic Buckyism about the pivot from weaponry to livingry.

Bucky looked around after World War II and is like,

great, we have the aluminum production facilities.

Let's just make the Dymaxion house.

Let's keep this effort and intensity and let's, without falling into this war on drugs, war on cancer, et cetera, let's fight the war on the fact that there's not enough for all of our nest mates.

But again, it didn't exactly happen that way. 122.

All of the foregoing makes it possible to say that since we now know that there is a sustainable abundance of life support and accommodation for all, it follows that all politics and warring are obsolete and invalid.

We no longer need to rationalize selfishness.

No one need ever again earn a living.

Further living for all humanity is cosmically prepaid.

So we take Bucky for what he wrote in collaboration with Applewhite, but I cannot help but hear that voice in my head that says, okay, let's say we nail that pivot from weaponry to livingry and then the population explodes.

Or for some reason there's enough propaganda and education such that the population stabilizes in some way.

Then what happens?

Will we not still have conflict?

Are we not just delaying conflict to some later time?

What about the game theory of somebody who is wanting to do more with less in an adversarial mindset when this system exists?

So how strong is that top-down control going to be?

Oh, well, you see, you're only renting your Dymaxion house.

So we're going to shut down your Dymaxion house as soon as you're not doing what our sense of doing more with less is.

So how will we have pluralism, but also sustainability?

It's like the tolerance paradox.

You can tolerate, but then it's possible to tolerate the intolerable, especially when there's differential sensitivities in a community.

So how will we make this work?

And we don't have to know upfront, but we will have to know because we will have to enact it.


UNKNOWN:
123.


SPEAKER_00:
Why don't we exercise our epical option?

Governments are financed through taxation and would have no way of putting meters between the people and their directly received individual cosmic incomes.

So too, private enterprise should no more meter the energy than it meters the air.

But all of Earthian's present power structures, political, religious, or capitalist, would find their interests disastrously threatened by total human success.

They are founded upon assumptions of scarcity.

They are organized for and sustained by the problems imposed by the assumption of fundamental inadequacies of life support.

So, a few points.

Governments are financed through taxation.

Are they?

Different times taxation might play a different role, but what about debt obligations or what about printing money?

then this is a very funny pun they'd have no way of putting meters between the people and their directly received individual cosmic incomes so meters could be like distance like three meters or this could be like a meter like a pg e smart meter and it's like no actually even with solar panels the government still does intervene with their meters unfortunately

And then this is sort of a suggestion, could be optimistic, could be naive, could be fallacious, that all the current political power structures, as well as these other kinds of power structures, are founded implicitly or explicitly upon this Malthusian assumption of scarcity.

And so they're...

only able to be doing local optimization in this globally vicious regime and so does that point the way towards a total transformation of power 124 why does not the public itself demand realization of its option for a revolution by design science why does not the public itself demand realization of its option

for a revolution by design science.

Less than 1% of humanity now knows that the option exists.

99% of humanity cannot understand the mathematical language of science.

The people who make up that 99% do not know that all that science has ever found out is that the universe consists of the most reliable technology.

They, the 99% here, think of technology as something new.

They regard it as threatening, both in terms of modern weaponry and job-eliminating competition for their life-sustaining opportunities to, quote, earn a living.

Ergo, humanity thinks it is against technology and thinks itself averse to exercising its option.

So this is the technology option.

And Bucky is saying, for many people, 99% is just a stand-in for most people, or it's even a stand-in for all of us most of the time.

Technology has been deployed in that Malthusian environment

military industrial paradigm technology is seemingly often used for either hurting more people with less or making more profit with less and even when the technology is ostensibly about like medical technology it still is wrapped in this layer of social control and medical etc so that even if the technology at its like core kernel layer is something that could be used for healing

Sometimes it gets really messy with all the layers of capitalism and control to get layered on top.

And this is an interesting claim by Bucky that all science has ever found out is that the universe consists of the most reliable technology.

Why does he say the universe?

Maybe because he's speaking a little bit more informally or outside of the synergetics ontology, talking more about like what other people think, but it's okay.


UNKNOWN:
125.


SPEAKER_00:
The fact that 99% of humanity does not understand nature is the prime reason for humanity's failure to exercise its option to attain universally sustainable physical success on the planet.

The prime barrier to humanity's discovery and comprehension of nature is the obscurity of the mathematical language of science.

Fortunately, however, nature is not using the strictly imaginary awkward and unrealistic coordinate system adopted by and taught by present day academic science.

So, the obscurity of the mathematical language of science.

Well, one easy take there is like, Bucky, are you really helping?

with this esoteric language.

And of course, there's a few comebacks, which is that synergetics is not the final text.

It's kind of like a catalyst text that helps us hopefully make not just more accessible mathematical, linguistic, and graphical artistic representations, but also results in physical artifacts.

So yes, you could go down the rabbit hole with Kirby et al on the quadras, or you can hang out with your child, hang out with your larva, and play with a tent.

And maybe that's all part of a bigger picture.

And so we do need the mathematical details.

Otherwise, they either get lost or co-opted by Grunge.

However, it's the fact that even the mathematical system in Bucky's framing is using this XYZ fake news paradigm.

And so that is what he is saying is adopted and taught by present-day academic science.

Harkening back to what Kirby had just been discussing earlier in this conversation, that the textbook manufacturers aren't teaching quadres.

I mean, every math textbook is XYZ, right?

So it cannot be done.

There cannot be a quadres textbook.

There cannot be a paradigm shift in elementary or middle school or high school or college or graduate or postgraduate math.

Why not?

Let's do it.


UNKNOWN:
126.


SPEAKER_00:
Nature's continuous self-regeneration is 100% efficient, neither gaining nor losing any energy.

Nature is not employing the three-dimensional omni-interperpendicular parallel frame of the XYZ axial coordinates of academic science, nor is nature employing science subsequently adopted grams centimeter second weight area time exponents.

Nature does not operate in parallel.

She operates in radiational divergence and gravitational convergence.

She grows outwardly by omni-inter-triangulated structuring from nuclei.

So, so many places to jump in here, but this is related to Knoll's formulas at the beginning of this conversation with the frequency of shapes and about how many spheres are needed to pack different shapes of different frequencies.

And that's kind of like accreting

larger and larger versions of the shape of different frequencies.

And this is the CGS system, the gram centimeter second.

Somebody might say, well, well, yeah, you can make these critiques against the XYZ system, but I mean,

centimeters grams and seconds am i right but it turns out that actually the relationship the pegging or the tethering of these to each other in the si system is very much predicated upon the xyz like one gram of water at four degrees c is one centimeter cubed and so that is what ties the distance measure the centimeter

to the mass measure of the gram.

So what if one gram of water were four degrees C of one tet volume of one centimeter on the edge?

So that would be like if we were to bake in this relationship between mass and distance,

in a TET-centric way with a TET volume and a 60 degree coordination and a nuclear accretion model rather than the XYZ model.

127, nature is inherently eight dimensional and the first four of these dimensions are the four planes of symmetry of the minimum structure of universe.

The omni-triangulated

Equivector edge tetrahedron.

In respect to the conceptual pre-time size tetrahedron's volume taken as unity 1, with its 6-unit vector edge structure, the always conceptual independent of size family of primitive pre-time size least complex polyhedra have the following exact volumes.

the vector-triangulated cube 3, the octahedron 4, the rhombic tricontahedron 5, and the rhombic dodecahedron 6.

When the size information is introduced, it occurs only as a frequency of modular subdivision of each unit vector structuring of the primitive families' respective 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 tetravolumes.

Frequency to the third power, F cubed, values then multiply the primitive already four dimensional volumetric values.

In physically realized time size, each has therefore four plus three equals seven dimensions.

But since each system is inherently independent in universe and therefore has spin ability, one more dimensional factor is required.

making a total of eight dimensions in all for experientially evidencing physical reality.

Great quote.

And this is the kind of quote that makes me want to have that integrated knowledge management system for synergetics and the synergetics ontology where we could just click, like every number is so special.

One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, 10, 11, 12, all of them.

And so it would be awesome to be able to like click on eight.

Okay, nature's eight dimensional.

Okay, eight.

What else do we know about eight?

Where else was eight used?

Just pull up every single equation where eight comes into play or every section in synergetics where it's using the term eight.

So that would at least help me and some other people navigate through.

But this is pretty interesting about nature being eight dimensional.

And what about 4D?

What about 4D time lock?

Triple zero, subsection 127.1.

So like we're deep in the decimal here because all of this is in section triple zero.

To define the everywhere and every when transforming cosmic environment of each and every system requires several more intercovarying system dimensions, planetary, solar, galactic, and intergalactic.

Because of the six positive and six negative degrees of freedom governing systems within systems, inter-transforming, we have eight plus six equals 14 dimensional systems in cosmic relationship governance.

Okay.

Fine.

128 nature is using this concept completely conceptual eight-dimensional coordinate system that could be comprehended by anyone fortunately television is spontaneously attractive and can be used to teach all the world's people nature's coordinating system and can do so in time to make it possible for all humanity to favorably comprehend and to exercise its option to attain universal physical success

thereby eliminating forevermore all world politics and competition for the right to live.

The hydrogen atom does not have to compromise its functional potential by first earning a living before it can function directly as a hydrogen atom.

Pretty interesting and orange.

So this notion of attraction and repulsion, tension, compression, we've talked about from a physical perspective, but as I sort of hinted at earlier, it's also attentional.

It's not meaning without tension, attentional, but attention, like a regime of attention, an act of inference.

And so the technology that Bucky knew to be very attention grabbing was television.

And so now it might even be said that we have some

more advanced technologies of attention management and shaping to design and perturb regimes of attention.

So maybe it's even more possible than it was before.

But of course, if the attention is going to be controlled and shaped by the grunge, we're not gonna get there.

So how can we harness attention and bring it into our control?

What is the role of cognitive security?

129, nature's coordinate system is called synergetics.

Synergy means behavior of whole systems, unpredicted by any part of the system as considered only separately.

The eternally regenerative universe is synergetic.

Humans have been included in this cosmic design as local universe information gatherers and local problem solvers in support of the integrity of the eternal, 100% efficient, self-regenerative system of universe.

In support of their cosmic functioning, humans were given their minds with which to discover and employ the generalized laws governing all physical and metaphysical, omni-inter-accommodative, ceaseless inter-transformings of universe.

Awesome.

What is synergetics?

Well, nature's coordinate system is called synergetics, and synergy is referring to emergence.

Last page, 130.

At present, 99% of humanity is misinformed in believing the Malthusian concept of the fundamental inadequacy of life support, and so they have misused their minds to develop only personal and partisan advantages, intellectual cunning and selfishness.

Intellectual cunning has concentrated on how to divorce money from true life support wealth.

Second, cunning has learned how to make money with money by making it scarce.

As of the 1970s, muscle guns and intellectual cunning are ruling world affairs and keeping them competitive by continuing the false premise of the universal inadequacy of life support.

If mind...

comes into supreme power within a decade humanity will exercise its option of a design revolution and will enter a new and lasting Epoch a physical success for all if not it will be curtains for all humanity within this century which one of those happened slash is happening

131.

In compliment with Synergetics 1 or 2, the books, the posters at color plates 1 through 10 may clarify for everyone the few scientific conceptions and mathematical tools necessary for universal comprehension and individual use of nature's synergetic geometrical transformings, inter-transformings.

So those 10 posters, that's kind of like Bucky's greatest meme hits before there was the image meme macro format.

there was Bucky.

And then closing footnote, Rudyard Kipling labored under the only you or me philosophy, but he was inspired by thoughts that it might someday be otherwise.

And so I'll read this whole poem by Kipling called When Earth's Last Picture is Painted.

So here's what Rudyard Kipling wrote.

When Earth's last picture is painted.

When Earth's last picture is painted and the tubes are twisted and dried, when the oldest colors have faded and the youngest critic has died, we shall rest and faith, we shall need it.

Lie down for an aeon or two till the master of all good workmen shall put us to work anew.

And those that were good shall be happy.

They'll sit in a golden chair.

They'll splash at a 10-league canvas with brushes of comet's hair.

They'll find real saints to draw from, Magdalene, Peter, and Paul.

They'll work for an age at a sitting and never be tired at all.

And only the master shall praise us, and only the master shall blame.

And no one will work for the money, no one will work for the fame.

But each for the joy of the working, and each in his separate star, will draw the thing as he sees it, for the God of things as they are.

All right, that concludes Synergetics 15.

And we had a spirit of abduction, logistics, and regeneration.

We had some captioning, technical heterogeneity, but I hope that for those who use the captions for accessibility, that they're still functional enough.

Thanks a lot for watching to the end.

Hope that you've enjoyed it and would just really look forward to and appreciate people's feedback and engagement and contributions on Synergetics.

It was a good section to look at with Zero because it's Bucky's narrative perspective on where we are and how we got here and also a little bit of where we're going.

And ain't that synergetics to connect the historical narrative with a personal narrative to the structural basis of reality and triangles and tets and the cosmic hierarchy and to our friends and our colleagues on the ship

our co-trim tabbers those that help us learn and stay supported when things are uncertain or challenging because we all need the whole crew on spaceship earth to make it happen so thanks again for watching again hope you enjoyed this and uh see you in synergetic 16 or i guess in some other live stream all right bye thanks