SPEAKER_01:
Hello everyone.

Whatever time it is for you, whether you're watching this live or in replay, thanks so much for joining Complexity Weekend May 2021.

It's been quite an awesome weekend and we're heading into the last third, the final stretch

We're gonna be having this live stream featuring some facilitators and some more interactive Jamboarding.

We'll talk about team formation and try to get a few more teams over that registration form bump.

And then we'll have a few more hours to work and prepare our presentations before that closing ceremony on Sunday, where we're gonna be hearing from all the teams.

So for the next 25 minutes or so, we will, as usual, listen to some music of one of our great facilitators, Michael Garfield, and then we will be talking to you soon.

So enjoy the tunes, and I will see you in just a few minutes.


SPEAKER_05:
Right on.


UNKNOWN:
so so

Thank you.

Wow.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_05:
Barbie life.


UNKNOWN:
Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Oh, no.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks everyone for joining.

To all of you who are watching live in replay, this is going to be yet another fun stream.

Thanks a lot for joining, Sean.

Let me make a few little tweaks and why don't you just say hi from whatever time zone you're at.


SPEAKER_02:
Sure.

Hello.

It is 7 a.m.

over here in central time.

It was actually fun being in the Gather space later in the evening yesterday where there was a good solid, just a group of people, you know, waking up and engaging.

It was just cool knowing at any given hour that everyone's connecting.

It was fun.


SPEAKER_01:
Nice.

So for this live stream, we're going to be starting off just...

Speaking with you all, taking any and all questions in the live chat, truly anything, it could be a complexity question and the worst case scenario, we're just gonna push it right back onto the community and see if there's somebody who knows it better than we do, because that's likely the case.

And then we're going to be speaking with a few facilitators, which ones we don't know yet, but we're going to find out who comes on and then we will just continue on the team formation.

We have several teams already registered and we're going to make it a big goal to keep pushing for that team registration, because when you coalesce on a team and

You get a few people together, have that shared purpose, start off on that long journey together.

It's really going to be a fun and markedly different phase for your complexity journey.

And also just one thought right off the bat is

a weekend hackathon style event.

I mean, there is so little time to actually make it happen.

I'm almost like wondering, how did you do it in the startup weekend and in other contexts?

How was it possible to connect and to get anywhere?

And then what happened after the weekend?

And then how can we take the best aspects of that excitement and productivity, but also marry it with that longer term view?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, great question.

It's a very different, like a startup weekend, for instance, versus like a complexity weekend.

In the startup weekend event series, you pick your team very early on.

Friday evening, you've already got your team, basically.

And it actually is much more individualistic in the sense that everyone's practicing pitching as an icebreaker.

And then...

The mic gets handed around, people get on stage, they pitch their startup idea.

Everyone's usually in that environment going for more of a for-profit, sometimes high-growth tech company.

Hey, CW Improval.

Sometimes some other form of business.

But everyone pitches the ideas and then people basically... Are you guys okay?

Can you hear?

Yeah, we can hear you.

Nice to meet you.

And, you know, basically everyone takes like a vote on what, you know, pitches they heard that they're most excited about.

And then the top ones get kind of put onto like big post-its around the room and then people vote by moving.

And then whoever's congregated around one post-it, boom, they're a team now.

And that happens in Friday evening on a startup weekend.

But that's obviously a very different context.

and i think you know for us it takes a lot longer for a team to gel and that's an okay that's a good thing actually because this is where we have very different outcome uh goals with start weekend versus like a complexity weekend uh whereas ours is much more longevity oriented it's many many different types of outcomes it's not as a kind of a small of a subset of focused outcomes uh as startup weekend

And the energy is just very different.

At a startup weekend, you're getting kind of pushed this idea of almost, you know, the deliverable for the hackathon.

And again, we don't have the same deliverables.

But for startup weekend, it's much more, can you even get like a first promise of sale by the end of the weekend?

Like that's really the main criteria that everyone's going for.

And so it's a lot of an emphasis on external calls and finding other entities out in the

agree that the solution to the problem that you're scoping out is real and the solution you're coming up with is something that they would adopt.

And that's kind of that context.

But Sudebi, Prabal, I'd love to hear from your experience in all these different kind of hackathon-like events.

What's different kind of between them and like a Complexity Weekend, for instance?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, Prabal, I think we should... Yeah, we can talk for hours about this.


SPEAKER_03:
That's what brings us back again and again.


SPEAKER_04:
I think, Sean, the favorite word we have for one of these hackathon events is innovation theater.

And I think that's where the difference between you guys and the rest of it is, I don't think we're trying to put up a performance that is not that big.

pot of gold at the end of the rainbow kind of where people need to, you know, perform and try and run towards, you know, it's like a temple run towards that pot of gold at the end of the rainbow, which is, you know, somewhere on Sunday evening on a typical hackathon.

So I think, you know, of course that is one of the

uh reasons that we keep coming back to you except of course we we love working with you guys and and and like you've done you know the monthly heartbeats are something which is completely different you know mostly whatever we see it be it a weekly hackathon or or be it a hackathon which is slightly of a longer duration we don't see uh we don't see catch-ups we don't see going back and trying to look at the measures of success that we thought

uh applied to the hackathon and see where we are uh you know keeping that depth in mind i think that really makes a huge lot of difference too when it comes to anything to do with innovation or you know be it social or otherwise so yeah and i would say that you know um a lot of people always use templates to do things and i'm not saying templates never work they do work in some cases which is why people use but i think


SPEAKER_03:
Personally, I'm quite averse to a template because I feel that the moment there is a template, there is no recognition of an individual in that template, you know, and the fact that the context can play a major role.

Why I'm talking about this is that you will see in different corporate spaces and other spaces, people using forming, norming, storming and all of these terms and you don't really know how it is used.

The other thing is that when we are talking about

complexity, I feel like there is always an attempt from the organizers and the facilitators end to use complexity within the structure of the facilitation and the design of it.

I mean, I would actually call it an oxymoron.

There was just two days of a complexity weekend related hackathon because you're then not really covering all the different parts.

You're not acknowledging the individuals who are then forming a team.

We can't just talk about collaboration in isolation without really focusing on how the collaboration can work out.

And there are so many reasons why people collaborate, right?

And I feel that's something that I find very interesting and very powerful that there is always a recognition that there are many reasons why people come together and there are many reasons why people may not want to come together.

So that recognition I think makes this process a very human and a very humble process.

Do we always get it right?

No, but I think

to us is all about learning and the focus is always learning.

It is never to come up with either jargon or to come up with really good sounding terms sounding right and then sort of getting a recognition which is that reward doesn't last.

I feel it's a sheer waste of everyone's time when you have a list of so-called solutions or whatever and then there is a competition happening about sounding right rather than getting it right for yourself and the team.

and then trying to win something.

So I think that nobody is, you know, it's always a win-win, I feel, the complexity week in structure.

Everybody is a winner because I feel the biggest winning for anyone for that matter is something like this is if you have learned something in the process.

And that, like I always say, learning is always about unlearning.

I definitely know that if people give the time that complexity weekend speaks for, definitely there's going to be some unlearning.

If nothing, it's also about so many other people, so many perspectives, you know, which might be not even contrasting to your points of view.

It could even be conflicting.

But then how do you come together and then go together, right?

I think that's really very, very different in complexity weekend.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I think one of the key pieces also is, you know, when the pandemic kind of pushed everything into, excuse me, you know,

you know, all of us being in this virtual medium, I think a lot of people around the world started assuming that the same rules which apply to a physical gathering apply to an online gathering, which is, hey, we are all human.

But the rules of collaboration, I wouldn't even call it rules, the norms of collaboration, especially in the online space, especially for a

multinational, multicultural events such as this is quite different.

So it's been a learning experience for all of us.

And I think those are also some of the nuances that you really, really focus on in trying to ensure, for example, that there are facilitators from around the world.

We've got 50 countries now.

If for nothing, it's also the culture.

And since we do a lot of work in that space, collaboration and cultures and how

It's an easy word to use, collaboration.

And often, like a lot of other things, a misused word.

It's not as benign as it sounds.

There's much more to collaboration than just quote-unquote working together.

And there are learnings, of course.

There are some that you learn along the way.

There are some that you understand.

There are probably some that you can speak about.

you know, one of the projects that we're working on for the United, sorry, for the, yeah, keep calling the United Nations for some reason, but for the European Union, you know, they call it the National Institutes of Culture and how they're trying to look at this entire idea of collaboration.


SPEAKER_03:
And fair collaboration.


SPEAKER_04:
And fair collaboration, yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
So, yeah, I think there's one more thing which I find quite interesting and more from a facilitator's point of view,

And possibly I can say it because we have been associated with complexity over a period of time.

I feel that I do a lot of work with teachers, teachers of primary education, middle schools, higher education and all of that.

And I feel like using design principles and learning design is something that's really my passion.

And I've been spending a lot of time on it probably for the last 15 years.

one of the things that i've often seen across the globe is that uh like in many other realms of life people have uh people like shortcuts right they want quick fixes and so they come up with a band-aid solution for everything with this technology so you think that the moment something is not happening let's use technology without giving much thought i feel that uh complexity weekend even for a facilitator if you see it like now uh you have used

I would say certain technological tools, which not many people might be familiar with.

I mean, it's a, it's a different thing that I think probably I do engage with different kinds of technological tools because that's something that we like doing, but it's not about the technology and saying, Oh, you know, it sounds very cool that I'm using gather and I'm using.

My, my interest always lies in understanding what would be different

If I were to use Keybase versus a Flack or a Discord, they might sound the same, but are they?

Each one has its own advantage.

Each one has its own limitations.

So when I think about someone is using that similar to Gather, right?

If I were to use Ajitsi versus Zoom versus Gather versus something else, you know, how each thing allows for certain things and I feel that

if one has to be a creative facilitator, it does allow a lot of thoughts to kind of think about the instructional design of what you're trying to do.

So for me, it's really like, you know, the medium and the message, they're really intertwined.

And that's how the metaphors come out.

And it's not really theoretical.

For me, it really, really makes you think that

I also then need to think about each person coming for a particular session or someone who's not coming for a session.

Because I've very often seen a very common thing amongst Complexity Weekend participants, especially the ones who are new, and maybe they're not so young.

That's a composition of participants we very often have.

And the moment you want to do some interactive sessions with them, unlike any other hackathon where people

primarily want to do they don't want to think they just want to do here they want to take time they would be like okay i'm observing right now i'm so new to this i'm just trying to figure things out so for me it's a very interesting design challenge in itself how do i cope up with uh the complexity of for example gathered right where i can't hold someone like i can hold in a zoom room i mean of course people have always have a possibility to leave

that's there but mostly okay i mean the complexity of room i would say would be that someone might be there and yet not there but here one can physically move out of a particular space and gather now how do i ensure that my communication is enough where i i take into consideration each one of those people try and like you know rather rather than being forceful about it but to say let's try our hand at this let's forget about the complexity of gathered

Let's not think about that as an overwhelming thing that the entire focus is about gathered and not really the activity that you can engage in, right?

So I feel that I find that quite interesting because this time when we were designing our workshop, we did put in a lot of thoughts around what all can we do within gathered differently because I think it's when I'm not challenging myself enough as a facilitator, if I'm doing it exactly the same way I would have done it for any other

online facilitation, right?

So, yeah, sorry we spoke a lot, but I think that's really our perspective.


SPEAKER_01:
I wrote down just a lot of

questions and words, but there's some awesome points in the live chat.

Dilek wrote, it's really nice to have people with different ideas and perspectives globally learning from each other.

Thanks for the event.

Well, thanks for being here.

And Barbara also raising the point that competition and pressure to produce results that look good can go counter to the need to explore

complex space and then sean you raised a question about funding so let's maybe have you raise that question and then would love to hear sudebian pro ball what you think about sean's question about funding here


SPEAKER_02:
i'm just trying to understand the role of funding kind of in the complexity weekend uh community of practice because you know again comparing to like a startup weekend uh it is very much a competition uh everyone's you know the final uh it's literally a pitch on sunday that you're giving is as it's in the same form as you would give for funding so it's like literally that is the output is a funding pitch and and so of course people are

going to the first you know solution they can come up with to get something tangible to share for sunday and everything is supposed to be as polished as possible and you called some people and had some promises that like this might actually be you know a real solution and and you know so that there's all that pressure to kind of

you know, go in on Friday and on Sunday, have a handshake and maybe I've already got some funding or something like that.

That's obviously different for Complexity Weekend and probably different with other hackathon-like events.

Can you just kind of go into how funding could work in a Complexity Weekend environment and maybe how it's different than these other environments?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I think I'll go and then Subha can add in.

So I'll tell you something that I had done as an experiment.

So you know that we facilitate in a lot of different kinds of innovation jams and hackathons and all.

There was one particular time where intentionally I participated as a participant.

And what happened over there was it was actually for a longer period of time because the structures were quite interesting.

There were lots of good things about it.

One of the biggest takeaways for me from that space was the kind of people I interacted with.

Because to be honest, the solution ideas

Even once we got funding, it really didn't matter.

What really mattered was the relationship type of posture.

Now, it was a physical gathering.

It was not online.

Currently, because of the pandemic, some of those are happening in the form of hacks.

So the reason I'm talking about this is that I did that to myself, although when I engaged in it as a participant, I went through everything that a participant might go through, 10 days of absolute

pressure, working towards things, me being a part of a team where I know I can actually facilitate, but then refraining myself from that space and from that process.

And going through even the frustrations that a participant might undergo.

I mean, the facilitators in that kept on telling me, while you're here as a participant, you actually can facilitate it better than we do.

And I'm like, I want to know what a participant undergoes or what others undergo, what group dynamics stand out like.

because I feel it's going to give me a very different kind of viewpoint.

So one of the things that I understood or rather I realized in a very first-hand experiential way is that not only does this funding thing create pressure, that's at a personal level, I sometimes feel it's unfair because when you do that for a very short period of time and there is a carrot of funding,

There are multiple things, right?

So one thing is that if we talk about a fair collaboration amongst people, giving people a choice, we need to acknowledge, first of all, a pitch is limited.

Nobody is going to give you hours of time to understand what it is.

They are just going to base it based on what they understand of what you speak in three minutes.

So I personally have a big problem about this elevator pitch.

And I'm not just putting my opinion.

I'll tell you what I've seen happen.

So there are people who

you know, first language is not English, right?

So first of all, in that process of pitching, very often, either people struggle to make sense of what they want to say, so their articulation sometimes might not be really showing what they actually have done.

So that's a big problem.

Second point is, the moment there's a competition like that and there's funding, that's a pressure, right?

Within the team itself, I've very often seen

The one who can speak English really well and also faster.

So you can see, for example, my rate of speech is very high.

I'm aware of it.

If I facilitate in a non-English speaking environment, I try to consciously make myself slower.

But the reason I'm talking about this is I think these are all things that lead to unfairness.

People tend to pick up the one who speaks faster than someone who takes time and

You know, because you will know that I can speak 100 words in a minute versus someone is going to speak 40 words in a minute, right?

So that's one of the other things that happens.

And then maybe the one who speaks better gets the chance

may not be the one who has come up with a really good idea or someone who can actually uh get into the depth of it so it's again about superficiality in presentation am i saying presentation has no value no i'm not saying that i think storytelling communication these are also important learning that one needs to hone as skills but that can come as a part of an innovation process i would say uh you know when you also learn how do you balance between depth

where you dig deeper, you look at things in a very holistic, systemic way without diluting the depth, then how do you communicate that?

Again, not sounding like it's a jargon and you're reading from a paper, you know, which is published.

So I think that that balance again needs time and this kind of a negotiation doesn't

have any room in a process like that where you are just trying to sort of say what probably might work and people completely like get templatized.

They will look at, you know, Shark Tank and Dragon's Den and all of these, they have an impact.

I mean, we all know popular media have an impact.

What people don't remember is even in a Shark Tank episode,

The episodes are way longer than what you see.

Nobody actually gives a three minute elevator pitch.

People do ask clarifying questions.

People do ask probing questions.

So the focus is again never on the problem training part of it.

And I often have seen, and from my experience, lot of projects which won the funding and therefore they thought that was a parameter of success, actually did not really do the requisite research that should have gone into

uh framing the problem or executing and and i feel that it will again become an oxymoron in a complexity became situation if that had to happen so fast because we do have to consider unintended consequences of the solutions that we are designing so can a process that is so fast consider the unintended consequences of what you're like proposing can it really consider a decolonized way of looking at things

know really fair way uh attaining real complexity and then coming up with a solution so am i saying that there shouldn't ever be any funding to complexity again no i feel that uh we need to think about it collectively when the funding can come into the place i think that when is the key and how we go towards that because um i think it's such an opportunity lost for uh for so many people

maybe people who had an amazing idea which should require some funding so many people can be impacted they are losing out on it people are uh you know are heartbroken because uh they know people who think that they have really done a lot of work and they are not getting the funding it also demoralizes them in that process where you think that oh what's the point in coming up with something which is really for the people when someone who hasn't considered anything is just

Like everything is based on the pitch.

So I think the format of getting the funding and the when of the funding, when would it come, really is essential to ensure that, you know, like Complexity Weekend is, it remains an authentic and genuine process.

And it really kind of does justice to the whole notion of complexity.

So it's a really long answer to your short question, but I feel there's no easy answer to it.


SPEAKER_02:
It's a great answer.

And actually, one thing I was thinking of while you were speaking was, you know, it's really important also where your funding comes from.

And I feel like my experience as an entrepreneur trying to get like venture capital funding is actually, I don't know if, I was doing actually a lot more social entrepreneurship type projects now that I look back and reflect.

And I was actually seeking the wrong source of funding.

And I think when you're in this kind of, for all terminology, the temple run, right?

You don't have time to consider unintended consequences like you're saying, including unintended consequences on your own endeavor, right?

By seeking the wrong funding source and kind of locking yourself into these relationships a little too early, maybe before you realize what is best for the team and the shared purpose.


SPEAKER_01:
And also, depending on our, just really quickly, our different backgrounds, from an academic background, I would have never even known that some of these avenues existed.

And when we're talking about innovation that connects research-like ideas with maybe application and including stakeholders, there's probably novel funding mechanisms that are available.

So how could we reward and incentivize that process and that relating rather than set up a structure where we know the kinds of outcomes that we're going to seek?

Yeah, Prabal.


SPEAKER_03:
I just want to tell you that you could give that example you were discussing while watching Shark Tank last night about nobody's questioning how the price is low.

Remember, you were talking about, yeah.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, so these are pet peeves that we have.

On a typical Shark Tank pitch, you would talk about the cost of goods and what would be the cost, land, etc.

And

We were watching the season finale for season 12 last night and there was this lady who was from Texas and she was making some products in China and her landed cost per product was about 1 pound 80, 1 dollar 80 pence.

So I was telling you, all these guys look at is how you always look at cost versus revenue and cost versus expenditure.

But I'm not really looking at how a product can be made in China and then shipped to the US for $1.80.

So what is really the cost approach?

And I know we don't want this to be politically important,

It's how much do you really pay somebody who works on creating the product?

I know they can do several different levels of automation, etc.

But that is not what China is known for.

It's people and you get cheap labor.

And how cheap can that labor be?

Do I even know whether these are prison camps, whether it's going to Vietnam or North Korea and China?

And nobody goes into those deeper ethical questions as long as the price is low.

And we work across industries and

Of course, the most common example that you now get is about the government, the fashion industry, right?

They don't look at how their sourcing is anything but ethical.

So do I use this forum, for example, CW is a great opportunity for me to look at the ethics of business itself, if we call it business, or the ethics of this entire sourcing and then taking to the market or whatever solutions we're talking about.

Is that an important part at all?

And since we're trying to create something different, I think


SPEAKER_03:
uh that's that's something that we can really focus on you know the externalization of the cost right because the moment you get into funding people would like to understand your business models and all of that and like you're saying that you know can there be ethics embedded uh like can you can you sort of think about the social cost the environmental cost and so many of those other costs associated with your uh intervention so one of the things that i i would say uh we have been a part of uh another

process and I would say one of the learnings that maybe we can take into context if we ever want to get into funding is what happened in that process is that through a longer process of innovation jam, not in a quick fix way.

some ideas which have the potential, they're not the ideas that are finally chosen, but they have potential to be taken forward because as you know that it ultimately has to be an idea which is practical, but it also has a theoretical and other kinds of research led river.

That's really a good idea.

So something which doesn't have any research backing it is definitely not an idea that that's going to not come with its unintended consequences.

And if you only have theoretical ideas, you will not be coming up with a practical solution.

So ideas which have some kind of a balance and they have potential, they are actually taken into some kind of an incubation period for one and a half to two months.

There are facilitators who actually take them through a very rigorous process to refine the ideal, you know, and that's the process where many of these considerations are made.

So what happens in that process, I would say the complexity we can, I mean, before even getting into the final funding,

One of the things that, I mean, I'm thinking about it in an ideal utopian situation is that some teams which probably have a lot of practical and good ideas around business, but they probably don't have the rigor to ask some of these questions.

You know, the user experience is not considered.

In the idea refinement part, we as facilitators help them do that part more.

If we find a team which has a lot of research to back them, but they have no business

model idea at all like you know like every step you can ask them questions and you know it's never going to be a sustainable model that's where we actually focus a lot on the business development part of that idea whereas ideas which have a little bit of both then we try and see how we can blend the two and then then ask provocative questions in terms of how can it happen i mean okay it's sounding like a good idea numbers are all fine and all of that then we bring in a more people-centric view into it and a more ecological

ecological kind of a lens to it that okay everything is sounding fine but do you think if you look at your solution from an ecological point of view it is a it's a regenerative model is it sustainable is it doing something which is not right ethically or otherwise and once that process happens it's a rigorous process whoever is chosen for the incubation period as a team

they have to commit a certain amount of time every week.

And there are modules formed that you go from here to there to get into that practicality.

And then after one and a half to two months, there is a pitching that happens, but the pitching is for a longer time.

And there is also a scope of people questioning that, you know, to actually understand it.

Again, not that the communication is the only way to sort of select something,

but there are ways to assess it.

So evaluation again plays a really important role.

And I mean, that's something that both Prabal and I have been working on a lot.

How do you evaluate an impact?

Because I think that's a very complex and critical problem, which most people don't have an answer to, but you can,

bringing a humanistic lens to actually doing uh evaluation of the program you know and i feel that evaluation is an integral part of the solution uh you cannot think about the solution or a design of something without thinking how are you going to measure the impact and i'm not talking about numbers in intangible ways also how do you capture those so once all of that is done then there are people there are funders who listen to all of it and then they choose some ideas so the ideas are then chosen and

In many of those cases, even then people are not directly giving them funding.

They have yet another incubation process.

Their ideas are further refined and then the money comes in.

So that there is a longer period of time to work through something really in a credible way.

I feel it also then tells you whether people are really committed to this or not, because you will also see another thing that happens.

And I've seen that happen many, many times that ideas, which are one funding

Let's say five members were initially there.

After winning the funding, you realize that there's only one person who is willing to or is capable of giving the time that it requires.

The other four, yeah, the other four have so many other things to do.

They fall apart, right?

So then they have to bring in someone else as partners or co-founders to take that forward and many ideas die their own natural death over there.

So I feel like time is a key and spacing it out is a really important factor.


SPEAKER_01:
Here's a thought on the time.

So I'm an insect biologist, so it's going to be an insect metaphor.

If the measure of success is the maximum amount of crop that you make this year and forget about the future, well, then you're going to bring in the honeybees to pollinate.

And when I drive around California, I see fields with hundreds of boxes.

people have brought in the honeybees on trucks to maximize yield.

And it makes sense under that incentive structure.

But then when you take a step back and think about through time, it reverts the focus to actually like what they call ecosystem services and all of the native bees that pollinate a huge number of crops.

And so there's a focus on the solutions that enable maximum yields to be gleaned in one year.

But then when you withdraw the honeybees, you've taken away the resources for the native bees.

So it's like now it's kind of like an addiction.

It's almost like you're actually worse off over the multi-year because you went for that short-term optimization.

So when we're thinking about funding, it's like slowing it down and using potentially some new mechanisms from crypto economics could be some very interesting ways that we can help slow down the process so that we get there.

You know, take it fast, we'll get there slow or some other thing like that.

Sean?


SPEAKER_02:
I'm actually trying to get actionable with this now.

I think this is all really good feedback.

And I'm wondering, Sudebi and Praval, if you want to work on this after the weekend, how do we actually take these monthly heartbeat structures and map that funding model onto that so that maybe not the heartbeat right after the weekend, or maybe not for the teams that just came out of the weekend,

but for the other teams out in the community of practice, slow it down, have them come to a heartbeat and really share the unintended consequences they've internalized, their stakeholder feedback they've internalized.

All the thoughts that get crammed out during the Temple Run dynamic,

uh have some sort of um not not i don't know maybe maybe it is a standard i'm not really sure but something that we ask teams to do the work on their own to bring that to the heartbeat you know in each month whatever teams are ready can have that format to kind of share it and then again like you're saying maybe another incubation phase that that might lead to resources and what does everyone think about that yeah i think sean like like you said uh


SPEAKER_04:
know funding starts with the with the funder right and and the the evaluation matrix that we are talking about it it primarily depends on what the funder looks at as roi from the from the investment that they're trying to make and i and i think so it's it's like uh it's obviously very cyclical in order so you need that funder who

know wants to fund projects like these for the right reason hopefully and and then you try and look at if you can you can set up that evaluation uh matrix with the with the funder to actually look at look this is this is what i'm looking for and imagine uh imagine a process where we can actually communicate to uh you know future cw uh participants that look this is this is your roadmap this is where you go uh from here to there

this is the funding or this is the kind of funding that we have and this is the kind of metrics that you're going to be evaluated for at say the end of three months and that creates a very logical glide path for anybody who comes on to CW and of course it would also test

uh you know the kind of participants that we have whether there are people who really want to take these ideas forward or you know these are you know just normal complexity enthusiasts who come and see what's going on and what's new and whatever is happening so you can kind of get to uh

use a sieve kind of in order to look at the ones who are quote unquote serious ones who are really looking to take their ideas forward and of course the ones that who are here because they want to join the gathering and learn about complexity altogether so maybe even in terms of the participants we can look at ones who are here for the experience and then there are ones who are really looking forward to taking this into the next you know logical steps etc so yeah i think uh


SPEAKER_03:
I'm smiling because I like facilitating a lot.

I'm actually thinking about it if you are all interested.

Maybe I can facilitate an ideation workshop amongst us and whoever is interested to see how this can be done.

Because we have a lot of ideas.

We have a lot of experiences also to sort of see how this can be chalked out.

And I would love this because it is not just about ideation

coming up with an idea because I think all of us are capable of doing that.

Also to challenge each other to every proposal here we give because this is also a solution that we are trying to obtain, right?

So to ensure that the solution is really ethical, the solution is really long-term, everything will have its own consequences.

That cannot be taken away.

But being aware of those consequences and making informed

and ethical choices, I would say I'm really happy to do that.

But we have to again then give time for it because I would imagine that we need like a longer period of time to go through that kind of an intense specification.

So I mean, if you are interested.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, to kind of go back to the farm insights metaphor, it's the difference between saying, hey, you have the title for this farm for one year.

Again, what is the incentive structure?

But when we make a commitment to serve through deep time, it's like it's the family farm or it's our regional community that we know that we're going to be in.

And then, yes, it sounds amazing to find a time scale, find the timeframe that's gonna work to hold that conversation.

And yeah, Sean and I were just messaging on a back channel, just writing down a few of these ideas you're mentioning.

Like, could there be a way where a team that shows up heartbeat after heartbeat

and is making it clear that they're incrementing and that they're including to innovate that they're really embodying all these things that we want to see like we don't have the official mechanism we don't have the the funding reserve yet but that's a team to me that's really succeeding and we would definitely do everything possible to help them


SPEAKER_02:
This is reminding me of Daniella Meadows' Thinking in Systems book.

And one example, you know, all the leverage points that she kind of outlines of ways to intervene kind of in a complex system.

And one of the upper leverage points, you know, small change could have a large impact on the system, is the information flows in the system.

And the example that she brings up is, you know, the factory that's pulling water in from the river.

You need to put their outlet above their inlet so that they must process that information.

Otherwise, like the one year lease on the farmland, they won't care.

They won't even process the information about the impact on their environment.

But if you put that outlet upstream, well, then now they must take it into account.

It is the family farm.

It is something that there's actual meaning to bad practice that will impact them.

And it's not just a problem for somebody else to deal with.


SPEAKER_01:
um fun and there's great comments like several people writing oh maybe a team can be formed around this idea of deep time i mean two people it's there's the equation right there shared purpose

connecting on the tools, connecting on the ideas, and then what else do they need?

Well, the team registration form, and then we're off.

The team registration form is not your final version.

It's editable, and we always keep moving, but there's something really nice about, again, just knowing that the timeline is out there in front of us, and we want to think about all these deliverables as checkpoints, not as end points.

So maybe you're welcome to stay on.

as long as you want, I just would love to hear about what you would say to a team that's at that exact stage.

Like, okay, I had a conversation with A about this and a conversation with B about that.

How do we convert to the team?

And then what should we, you know, share during the weekend so that we can move forward successfully?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I think I'll just take us back to something that's

Sorry, the battery has died off.

He's going to get the cable.

Anyways, I'll continue.

Yeah, so I think I'm going to go back to, you know, the reason why we thought about doing the workshop that we designed and facilitated yesterday and would like to continue doing.

So we called it designing people and designing for people.

Now, the purpose behind that was, you know, when I come together as a team and I'm trying to design a solution,

one is to kind of think about the people you are designing for people you are consciously thinking about people you're not thinking about but they are going to be impacted but it is also to think about the people in your team uh and and i feel that very often this is a part which goes amiss in our in a collaboration it's very important to understand uh and acknowledge what is the motivation of each individual within a team and and that's really important without which i feel like one can't move forward right

And I would say that there needs to be some kind of mapping of those motivations.

And I know that one might say that, oh, I'm going to have an icebreaker.

Talk to people and say, hey, what has motivated you to join it?

I'm not talking about just that.

I'm talking about really spending time and understanding the motivation.

Maybe asking some of these questions where to say that if we take this forward and I think about it long term,

I really understand that we live in a very uncertain world, so things might change.

But at least from your intentionality perspective, do you intend to commit to this over a longer period of time or over a shorter period of time?

Secondly, if things go okay, then what level of commitment can you be giving for this?

And that kind of brings you to the question.

I think it's a chicken and egg situation.

where one of the teams might say that we will decide how much time to give for staying here for longer, depending on where it can go.

I mean, if we know that there might be a potential funding and we as a team might be showing more interest because that's something that I can afford.

I mean, someone might say that, you know, I have a lot of interest in showing commitment.

But my practical situation in life is such that unless and until I have some financial backup, I can't commit.

So it is not really a problem of intention.

It's also to understand where that person is coming from, right?

And maybe this team can keep on showing up one heartbeat after the other because they're working towards it.

Whereas you might say that there might be a team which might be just taking part in it for the sake of learning.

But I definitely would say a major part of this should be that the team members know each other at the level of motivation and purpose really well.

They need to understand the kind of values that they are guided by.

Again, not to use values for the sake of saying that, oh, these are my values.

Basically to have a conversation, which might even be difficult to have, but basically to say exactly the things that we were talking about, that are you someone who

happy to take an idea forward without doing ethical considerations now the other side of it is that you also know that a team might be comprising of two people who are very practical who want to get into the next part and get going there might be two people in that team who are very ethically conscious

And they're so ethically conscious, they're more like activists, that there is nothing that's moving forward in it because they're constantly posing an ethical question to it.

So how do you bring a balance?

How much do you analyze?

How much do you frame problems?

How much do you spend time in backing your work with research?

And then when do you sort of decide that this is the point when we can stop it, then move on, maybe we can revisit it.

Unless and until these things are done within a group, I think that you can come up with the best idea over a weekend, but that idea is going to definitely die down.

You will feel very happy and think about it, it's not going to go.

So I think, I would say, 50% of the time, for a team, I would say, before the complexity weekend ends, when we are together in this immersive space, they should outline all of these and say, what works, what doesn't work, what kind of mechanism, I would even say something as simple as

How do they keep in touch?

One of the things that I have noticed in my last part and half year experience since the pandemic had hit us all is how you keep in touch and in what form, through what medium and what you are comfortable about makes or breaks relationships.

people just feel so fatigued with screen that they just don't want to keep it up through a screen-based thing you know some people want to see another person over a video for some other people that doesn't work so I don't think there should be any assumption there should be absolute like you know a very important conversation and being authentic about it that someone might say oh you know I know Keybase is amazing but

I can say yes to it now, but I'm not the guy who's going to keep in touch to KeyBase.

That's not my medium.

So one way is to say, Oh, I'm going to change the person's behavior and say, you have to be comfortable with KeyBase.

The other way is to acknowledge that and say, okay, maybe we need to get on a call.

and see each other, for example, and talk through things.

Some people really like, you know, when you have things written down, they want to read that in advance, think about it, and then come for a meeting.

Whereas some people, writing is a big hindrance for them to get into anything.

They would like to first come, ideate together, whereas some people want to ideate alone and then come together, right?

So I feel like some of these very important and very often overlooked things need to be taken into consideration.

and also to say who is the big idea person in your team, who is the person who really gets into the details and even to kind of take a check, reality check of whether your team is balanced.

If you have everybody in your team who have all come together for the passion of the team, but behavior wise, background wise, interest wise, they're all very similar, they need to figure out a way how to bring that balance, right?

Now once that is done,

and i would say the next thing is to sort of say that uh how do we move forward and i think there's no right and wrong answer but if you think that you are investing in long term into this how do we go about it so basically to create a team charter kind of a thing

And in the team charter, some teams might say that we decided by this weekend, we need to think about one idea and then later on figure out the other thing.

Some teams might say, you know, our ideas are so ill formed.

We have just come together.

Maybe we are giving ourselves two months to even get into a properly framed idea, but we still would continue to work on it.

Right.

But what's going to be a disaster for a team is where one member is here to learn about complexity.

So even if you're getting into a funding zone, they're still

trying to learn complexity and you know, there's no end to it, right?

They just want to acquire more and more knowledge around it.

One person in a team who only is interested in coming up with a solution, they don't want to understand anything about it.

So, having that and maybe identifying an internal facilitator within the team, and that can also shift, I would say.

But this team formation part I think is key to anything.

That has been my experience.

Otherwise,

Ideas can come and go, you can actually be hit with an amazing idea and can refine it a little later.

But finding that common thing towards which you would be working, right?

And one of the things that I would also say that, even to kind of say that, are we going to invest enough time in understanding people who are going to be impacted by what we're working on?

That's actually a very good thing that can bring people together, you know?

Even in the past, in Complexity Weekend, Livestream and otherwise, we have very often spoken about how if many people, even if they don't know each other, work together towards a collective and shared inquiry, it works well.

Because the moment you work based on a common idea already, it creates conflict.

Because you are only going to get people who are going to say yes to each other.

Or people say, oh, I'm only interested in biological sciences or sociology or something else.

We feel that it's okay if five members of a team are interested thematically about many different things, because they can find the commonality, right?

But they need to be able to articulate for themselves what is it that they're seeking out of it.

And that should be a filter to move forward, I would say.


SPEAKER_02:
I've got a question just from all this discussion.

So I think you're outlining really interesting ideas of the balance between thinking versus doing and how like a team charter or maybe an internal facilitator could be a means of finding that balance.

But since we're all kind of thinking about complex systems and the connections between systems, how do you balance overthinking on connectivity versus not enough connectivity?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I think sometimes guidelines help, Sean.

Like we were saying, we don't want it to become a process which is templatized, but there might be guidelines that we provide people, especially ones who are not used to the process at all.

And using our collective intelligence and thoughts around it, we can think about, like you have, like Sudebi was talking about the team charter, you know, the team charter

terms of reference document, for example, can be something that can be extremely helpful to a process like this.

So instead of letting, of course, we know there is some level of, you know, hand-holding we do with respect to team formation, et cetera, and we look at it on team-based and other things.

So maybe there is a process that we can define

And it is up to the members of the team about what they adapt from the process.

But at least there is a set of guidelines.

There is some kind of a wonderful, better word of framework which they can work with or work through.

And that kind of gives them some level of support, even if we don't get to a level where an individual facilitator for some time works with the team in order to ensure that they are working towards the ultimate goal.

there can be a framework that they can use, which we can develop for them, which kind of comes in very handy for a process like this.

So not everything is intangible.

There are some tangible parts that are great for them.

And then, you know, it is the majority of the team and the members that are often in order to take it forward from there.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I mean, you can even find something like, you know, I've very often seen that you might be having a team of

people who have come together, they have shared purpose, everything, but their working styles are so different.

I think that's another thing one needs to have good clarity on.

how people work, what are their personal working styles and preferences, which could also include that some people in a team actually thrive when they take risks.

If you ask them to be in their comfort zone and work on something, that's not motivating enough for them.

Some people, they would say that I am not going to take risks over here and this is not for me to experiment.

I would rather be in my zone of comfort and I'm going to do it well.

So that's also another balance that needs to be brought in, right?

I mean, a concept very often that I bring into my work, and I'm sure many educators do bring in, is the notion of zone of proximal development, which Vaibhatsi talks about, right?

So how much are you making your task, the task that you're taking for your team, like comfortable enough for you that you don't lose it, you get told by them that you'll stop working, but how much challenge are you putting it

you know, into the task, that it actually makes you better.

So that ZPD or the zone of proximal development is something that I think everybody has a different zone of proximal development.

And that is something for them to sort of figure out.

Because unless and until that happens, I feel that, you know, again, I mean, this is where I would say that internal facilitation within teams is important.

externally one can give you a canvas or a template or some guidelines but what can be done is maybe we can talk about a few frames or a few things that they need to think about but they need to come together and maybe put it into writing you know sorry dan i think you wanted to say something


SPEAKER_01:
You know, bringing in the external facilitator, that's the honeybee.

Okay, you do that, you do that, and then withdraw, and there's no endogenous support.

Whereas we want to think through deep time and ask, how can we each...

facilitate in our own way and each bring our own perspective so that that ecosystem is balanced so that when there is a perturbation and there will be perturbations, there will be negative perturbations, positive, there'll be ones that transcend negative and positive like funding.

Oh, money's good.

Keep thinking because it is sometimes certain types.

And so how can we make it so that we're planning for resilience and for anti-fragility?

And that's where we need a distributed facilitation concept.

And our facilitators lead by example and they work on teams, but it's really something where it's like everybody is gonna be playing a role because if there's somebody who's not playing an active role, they're not gonna feel included and they're not gonna be included and they're not gonna be contributing as much as they could.


SPEAKER_05:
Yes.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, absolutely.

In the last just couple of minutes that you're on here, Sudebi and ProBall, okay, there's a great question from Sid in the chat.

I know this could be a five-hour question.

What books, movies, and podcasts do Sudebi and ProBall recommend the most?


SPEAKER_03:
Oh, that's...

It's a really difficult question.

I mean, I won't recommend any specific ones.

I mean, I think that it's again something that in today's world, I feel it's a skill that we need to hone, that we need to find our own interests and need to know where to find them.

And I'm sure most of us have felt it.

Like, you know, when we were growing up, people like us were, you know, like who have seen that transition, who are neither too old, not too young.

mean the role that we had i remember for a school project we have to figure out where to find something right and what to find so in an information rich world i think that's one of the biggest uh like skills one can hold how can you be self-directed what to take how much to take and how much to reject you know and this

no right and wrong answer.

I mean, I can say that a podcast which has worked for me brilliantly might absolutely not work for you.

So it depends on what you're seeking.

So I would actually push it back and say that maybe a process of seeing what is it that I'm seeking to have my own trajectory and then finding, you know, the internet can be a space which is like a map, but it can also be like a junkyard, right?

If you are looking at it that way.

So you finding your own compass

to navigate through that map is what I think we need to do, you know.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I think that since we work with a lot of students and young professionals, I think this is a very often posed question, you know, and I think it's, sorry for being radical about the hunter state, but I think, you know, this is also something which is a myth which has been propagated by people who gain from books and podcasts and other things.

I think that

True inspiration, you know, whoever has been an entrepreneur out there, there is no, you know, one way from A to B or three ways from A to B. I think it's like we were saying, there's so much information now.

I think the role that we all have is how we synthesize information.

It is not about where to look for the right pieces of information.

Any information can be good as long as you can synthesize it, depending on your own needs and then go on to deal with it.

You know, when some of our student interns, et cetera, come up to us with the same question, we often tell them, you know, you can read a book, but the books can be like the honeybees you were talking about, you know, Dan, you know, I feel great when I read it.

I feel great when I hear the podcast.

And then how do I get on with the rest of my life?

How do I actualize it?

How does the knowledge convert into wisdom?

I think the wisdom is what we are looking at.


SPEAKER_03:
And there's politics of knowledge as well.

And I would actually say that I met somebody very interesting, a designer who actually said as he started working with people, he started realizing and he does a lot of work with children.

He realized the fallacy of his own education, the fallacy of his own bookish knowledge.

And he thought that there is nothing that he thinks on his own.

Everything is taken from some book or from someone else.

And, you know, he stopped reading books

He actually said that in the last 10 years of his life, consciously a person who was a big book lover, he stopped reading books and he said, I'm only going to listen to people.

I'm only going to observe people and see what I can think for myself.

So I know it's a very radical view, but it really shook me to think about it.

How many people do we know who only focus on people who have read a lot, but they're reading someone else's language.

Can I think on my own and maybe say my experiential knowledge

my knowledge about people and my actual interactions with people are informing what I know about the world.

So yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

We're going to have facilitator Sid join Sudebian Pro Ball.

As always, really awesome.

I know that you're going to be there in Gather and just helping people get over that bump, get over the team registration.

And just while Sid is joining, Leon wrote a great point.

Talk about how we need more folks to rise into the role of being Chaos Pilots.

My previous team at Singularity University tried to develop frameworks and guides around that.

That sounds pretty cool.

Welcome, Sid.

CW Pro Ball, you're welcome to hang out, or you can just close the window.

Yeah, great to have you on.

Oh, Sid.


UNKNOWN:
Bye-bye.


SPEAKER_04:
Bye, Sid.


SPEAKER_01:
Bye.

It's a cheap trick, Sid, what you've done.

Oh, man.

Do you want to say hi and introduce yourself?

And then we can go where we want to go.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I saw a lot of books in their background.

So that was an obvious question for me to ask.

So yeah.

Hi, everyone.

I'm Sid.

And the reason you see ants behind me is because my first name ends with an ant.

It's suffixed by an ant.

So I'm very fascinated by ants.

And I think you should see the full background, by the way.

So...

So yeah, I think we were talking about two different things there.

One was funding and the second was how do we continue working in the metaverse?

So I think we can start from there, whichever point we can branch out from.


SPEAKER_01:
Perfect.

Let's start with what is a metaverse and then maybe we'll bring it to the operations of funding later.

But what's a metaverse?

Are we in it?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I mean, this is the metaverse where we are right now.

So I think a lot of us here might have some background in World of Warcraft or some background

games from that age, like Second Life or even someone who comes from a bulletin board system background.

Like I was too young for BBS, but I think there are a lot of people who adopted the cyberspace early on and all of them have been in the metaverse.

Even if you were writing letters to your pen pals, even before internet was invented, you were living in some sort of metaverse, which is not in your physical space.

So I was just attending this conference from Stanford yesterday.

It's called Redefining XR, Extended Reality.

So this is the first time that a professor in that course is forced to offer an entire semester's worth of course on virtual reality.

So like 80 undergraduate students from Stanford all got an Oculus Quest headset and all of them will attend a virtual reality class in virtual reality.

So this is the metaverse that we are heading towards, but in the broader sense, anything besides the physical space can be classified as a metaverse.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

So how do we connect that metaverse idea to, I guess, our day-to-day or hour-to-hour here in Complexity Weekend?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think we have been in the metaverse for the last few months through Keybase and I think the heartbeat is a good way to continue living in that metaverse.

So the metaverse is always driven by the community.

So like every decentralized structure, like Complexity Weekend still needs

some sort of centralized scaffolds like the organizers to keep the metaverse sane and to keep it organized so that we can have organized chaos later on.

So that's why I think we need the health of the metaverse depends on the participation in the metaverse.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Maybe let's go to that funding point then, because you mentioned quadratic funding.

And for those who have been in academia or traditional venture capital or some other area, is that linear funding or what is quadratic about this style of funding?

And then how could it play into a distributed community of practice like ours?


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

So this is a field that is fairly new, both in the world and it's even newer to me.

Like there's so much happening in the world of crypto and crypto economics these days that it's hard to be on top of those things.

But I think Christoph gave a talk on token engineering and he had a model for funding which included quadratic funding.

So the difference between linear funding, which is prominent in academia, that there's a central funding source and that trickles down to the people who need that funding, has been very popular and it's a very robust mechanism in some organized systems.

But when you have a distributed community, you cannot expect a veil.

So in funding terms, a veil is a person with the,

highest bag of available funding resources.

So when you have a community, you can expect to have contributions from lots of different individual members of the community.

And those contributions don't add up linearly.

They instead are matched with an equivalent amount from avail.

So if all three of us contribute $1,

the total contribution in a quadratic funding scenario would be much greater than $3 because a funding whale would be funding exponentially more with each added participant to that funding pool.

So this model has been very popular in open source software development.

So that's why I pasted that link to Gitcoin.

Many open source projects there have been

successfully funded through, uh, quadratic funding.

So I'm not sure if we can share the screen right now, but, uh, we can also have, uh, we can also have our own.

Yeah.

I'll try sharing my screen to one second.


SPEAKER_01:
Go for it.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

So, okay.


SPEAKER_01:
Can you see it?

Yep.

We see it.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

So

Yeah, that's the difference between quadratic funding.

So firstly, we were talking about competition and scarcity of resources in that talk.

So funding is most prominent when it comes to public goods.

So public goods is something like a complexity weekend.

Like we are not fighting for resources, we are collaborating.

So when it comes to funding public goods, quadratic funding is a very good idea there.

So I think Complexity Weekend is along these lines, open source, free education and free services.

So we depend on, so if some project requires funding, it's a good idea to do it quadratically because there's

The formula that's used, so we'll not go into the exact formula of funding, but this is the difference that quadratic funding makes.

So if this slide is visible to all of us, you can look at the column number C and see that if you have 20 contributors instead of five or two contributors, the total funding amount can be the same.

But the matched amount and the percentage return that you get on the funding can be at least six to seven times, five to seven times of your original linear funding source.

So column A is representative of research grants in academia, whereas column C is more representative of quadratic funding and community projects.

So this is Gitcoin.

So, yeah, any open source contributor can contribute here.

So we can have, for example, a complexity weekend collection here and present different projects there.

And just they have funding pools available from time to time.

We can explore one of these grants and see if,

if that helps in funding the community.

So all of this is, okay, I'll stop sharing the screen once again.


SPEAKER_01:
Quick little fractal, just a quick fractal.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
um that sounds awesome it might be a good thing to actually make a team on here and it's a great example of why we can't just pitch on friday and deliver on sunday because many people might be hearing about this idea for the first time and think yeah we're not going to finish the collection we're not going to finish the idea today but heartbeat to heartbeat

That sounds very powerful, especially if we could be developing an open source stack.

For example, many tools have already come out of Complexity Weekend, like Dentropy, Daemon, and the ability to interface with Keybase, but to work towards a distributed community stack and

imbue complexity and accessibility throughout would be something very powerful and something that I hope a lot of people would be wanting to do.

And we can all contribute in different ways.

Like someone might want to be leading that sort of financial side.

And then also anybody who wants to contribute their time and attention, which is truly priceless, can help co-organize and help catalyze those teams.

So it's like, do you want to be


SPEAKER_02:
in that team or do you want to be at a level above that team helping that team form yeah sean and then sid anything else uh i i think this all these points about funding are really interesting and i do think there is a team out there if anyone's interested we can think about these ideas and how to maybe implement them and spread them out over the monthly heartbeats and you know allow the teams to kind of step up into that funding in the time that makes sense to really have everything considered that needs to be before the funding is actually grabbed i actually want to take the conversation back to the um

the metaverse point.

I'm curious that if you have any advice for teams, especially global remote teams that are coming out of Complexity Weekend like events, what should they consider while they're generating their own metaverses?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so as much as possible, if they can work in a physical space, I would highly recommend it, even though most of us spend a lot of time in the cyber world, because I don't think anything beats physical connection.

So especially in the context of multi-team projects.

So I can narrate one experience from my life where such kind of a weekend had a major impact.

So I think weekends like this in the metaverse or in the physical space can be summarized by a quote from Lenin, which is like, there are decades when nothing happens and there are weeks where decades happen.

So first search weekend in my life was a design innovation workshop by MIT Media Lab.

So that was when I was in my third year.

And a whole team of 60 to 100 people from MIT flew down to India.

And they just rented an entire college campus and divided us into 10 different tracks, from synthetic biology

designing sensors across scales to like smart textiles and all sorts of emerging technology projects and also public policy and civil design.

So what was special to me about that was there was no scarcity of resources.

They managed to get a whole boatload of hardware and funding resources from there and they managed to ensure that

Whatever hardware component we needed, we had access to that.

And as a beginner, you look up to these resources.

If you are in an environment of scarcity, you won't be able to innovate.

So I think projects, even in the metaverse, also sometimes die out because of a lack of time or a lack of resources of any kind.

so some sort of support from be it attention or time or mentorship is very important in the metaverse and the second thing that i learned in that particular workshop was they made teams and they ensured that there were different people if it's a five member team

There should be an electrical engineer, there should be a designer, there should be a computer scientist, and one more person from a business or management background.

And it was interesting to see that after a week of exploring together, all these roles were flipped, like the computer science guy was doing business stuff, the business guy was starting to program things.

I think that was very important.

Each one of them are leaders in their own fields, but when they work together, all of the rising tide lifts all the boats together.

So I think that's very important in Complexity Weekend as well, because we all have different XP points or whatever gaming metaphor you want to put there.

All of us have different experience points in different fields, but when we work together in a team, the experience just quadratically increases and helps the entire project.

But it does require a lot of funding in terms of time, money, and resources.

Now, the specifics of the metaverse, we started from, it can be a simple Google Docs document, like let's go no code, no tech.

A simple Google Docs document and getting the basic idea out there can be one of the biggest steps in getting the basics of the project right.

After that, you can start exploring tools like Spatial or different metaverse tools like VRChat or Jitsi or whatever tool you want to collaborate on.

Gather is a very good example and an application of many people working together.

So that is the second part.

And third is the actual development part.

I think that happens on platforms like GitHub when it comes to software projects.

About other projects, there are alternatives to GitHub, which I think we can get into.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool, Sid.

Thanks.

We'll ask one more question here, and then we'll bring up the Jamboard and try to bring this to the team formation stage.

So you talked about the co-location and also about some of these tools that might exist for working remotely.

You've worked on the cyber physical in many capacities.

So when we're dealing with teams where there's differences in the tools that they're using, how do we take all of those differences in our character class, in our experience levels, in our whatever is in our bag?

I mean, how can we just know that we're showing up for each other as humans, but also that there's a task to be done?

It's an infinite mystery, but I would love your insights here.

And also, how can it be secure?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, it's an infinite mystery with a surprisingly simple answer.

Just have a messaging app, messaging group in a messaging app like Telegram or Discord or WhatsApp.

It's like something that does not require extra steps to set up.

Like most of my collaborative projects happen on Telegram.

And I think half of the crypto community is collaborating on Telegram.

So, uh, like, uh, even if I could extend that to say most government work or most organizations now are shifting to discord and telegram, especially in the cyber physical space.

So just becoming friends in that telegram group or that WhatsApp group is the first basic step to do anything substantial in their projects.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

So I'm going to share.


SPEAKER_00:
Or use Keybase.

Just use Keybase if you're cared about privacy, if you care.


SPEAKER_01:
What future platforms could exist?

What's on the horizon in the next few years that teams could look forward to?

Because sometimes it's dismaying to see that each platform is engineering to build walls.

They each platform, Telegram, Slack, Discord, they've all added their own video chat features rather than allowing for interoperability.

So we heard from Dave Snowden about connecting silos, but that's not the way that platforms are developing.

How can we make sure that we're developing towards a future where that might be possible and what might be possible then?


SPEAKER_00:
I think Jitsi that we are using for this live stream is a very...

Good example of that.

That's an open source application, I think, which will be supported by many different applications later on.

But these platforms keep evolving.

It's a complex web of messaging applications out there.

So I think all of us need to keep evolving with them.

So there's no other way.

Like we were on IRC just a few decades before, internet relay chats, then those are still alive, but we can't expect all people right now to join an internet relay chat.

So these platforms have to evolve and people have to evolve with these platforms.

So as of 2021, Telegram is a good option if you're not overly concerned about privacy.

because it supports a lot of human communication and it's very easy to set up.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

I shared the Jamboard link in the live chat.

And so we're going to first just go to the 13th slide where we're looking at another colony of ants as they are helping each other map the gap, helping each other over that team registration form barrier.

And the link will also be posted.

But Sean, what would you like to head over to in the Jamboard?


SPEAKER_02:
Let's start on 13 and just kind of articulate the team registration form and maybe even just jump into that form real quick and give it an overview.

This is really the key moment right now where we need to be identifying everyone in the cohort who wants to be on a team

matching them to a team that is open to new members or help them start a team.

And we need to fill out this form so that if your team wants to, again, your team can stay completely off the grid if you'd like.

But if you want to signal the Complexity Weekend that you'd like support from facilitators and just in helping you find your shared purpose and have team longevity after the weekend,

This is the way to signal that.

So Dan, maybe walk through that for a second and then maybe we'll go to slide 14.


SPEAKER_01:
That was good.


SPEAKER_02:
Sorry, slide 16 after.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

So just to walk through, really the required question is just your email.

We just want to make sure that we're going to be able to be in contact with you.

And there's something that as organizers we get, we get to know that you did make it happen as a team.

We get to stay in contact with you, but also you'll see that some of these questions, they're optional, but they're conversation topics for you to get at with your team.

So we ask about the team name.

We ask about the current people on your team.

with first name and a key base identity, which is a nice piece of key base that you can make multiple key base identities and switch between them quite easily.

So you can have some identities that are very connected to your real world, you know, legal name, straw man, et cetera.

And then you can have other identities that are very private.

And we hope that will facilitate a lot of kinds of collaboration.

And then any email addresses for people who would like to be contacted

We then ask if the team's interested in having their name on a coworking space in Gather.

And remember the weekend kind of never ends because for those who you meet in the cohort, you're always gonna have access to that Gather space and it's gonna be 24 seven.

It's like a no host coworking space.

So you can always just pop back in there.

And then if you want to include people who weren't in the cohort in the team eventually, which is totally a great thing, and many teams have done that, then make your own gather space, make your own key base team, just clone off the stack that we're using, and you'll have familiarity with the tools already.

So we're not just onboarding you to these tools for those of you who are unfamiliar so that we can see you there.

It's actually so you can make the best of it.

And then if you go, okay, I understand why they did this, but I think there's a better tool.

Great.

iterate on it for your own teams, and then give us feedback so that we can improve our stack as well.

Here's a question.

What's a question or issue your team will be addressing?

So I'll pass it to Sid.

How do we come to a question or a problem framing that is in that sweet spot of motivational, exciting, tractable, plausible, specifying a deliverable or not?

How do we navigate all the possible ways that we could frame the question because we know that so much of the project is actually in that framing?

How do we converge even just on a first draft of that sort of question?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think there needs to be that initial spark that brings those people together.

So for example, I think Dan started an explore genomics sub channel.

So, so like just getting those initial seed of people, four or five people is very important to,

Just even start exploring that question.

So yeah, I think first you need those critical mass of at least two to three people to get those things started.


SPEAKER_01:
And it's something we've heard from Sudebi and Proball, from you, from a lot of other facilitators, which is almost like focus on the connection, getting into the chat thread, figuring out how you're going to stay in touch, and then let that be your trampoline so that whenever you can bounce back on that.

Whereas if you don't connect, no matter how cool of a question it is, you're just going to get lost in the movement of the metaverse.

But when you're connected, then the question can change.

And we've seen teams morph from topic to topic and from an initial idea of the direction to another idea later on.

We ask about how complexity informs your team's approach.

And again, I'm just curious, Sid, in your work or in all of these projects that you're involved in or aware of, how does complexity inform your team's approach, especially when you might be working with some people who are very familiar with complexity and others who are learning by doing at the very introductory phases?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so I think my brief chat with Shirley comes to mind.

So we were just discussing that applied complexity is just applied curiosity.

So you don't need to think of it from a lens of complexity or learn the hundreds of models of complexity and organization and

chaos that are out there.

Like whatever you're curious about, I'm pretty sure complexity has a metaphor for that.

So just start with that.

And I'm pretty sure a complexity enthusiast will find a way to connect it to some concept in complexity.


SPEAKER_01:
Nice answer.

Applied curiosity, applied simplicity, applied pragmatism.

These are all things that we can have under a banner of complexity as a keyword.

We then ask for your team's Keybase name.

And this is going to be a new feature in Keybase for some people to go to the teams tab and then create a team.

But that's how you actually form that shared identity.

Keybase teams can have people be added and removed.

So again, you're not locked in stone, but then you're going to be able to have sub channels.

So we kind of

hold it first as a sub channel on our cohort team, like project, and then an animal name or something like that.

But eventually when you break off to your own Keybase team, then you can have a channel of papers, funding opportunities, questions.

Those are all ways that you can then go into your own homestead, your own farm and build that out the way you wanna see it.

Sean?


SPEAKER_02:
I think this is the great inception of Complexity Weekend.

I think whenever we have the Complexity Weekend event is all this pre-weekend we've been doing and getting people trained up on Keybase and gathering asynchronous and synchronous in this kind of metaverse that we've learned to use over the weekend.

This team registration form is a mitosis event where you basically get your own cell with the same exact tech stack that we've all become familiar with, and that is now your team's initial tech stack.

And it doesn't have to be the one your team always uses.

It's just we're all on the same page at this moment in time on this metaverse.

Why don't you just take, you know, fork a copy of that, have a copy for your team, and you can start those conversations with a stable metaverse, maybe you could say that, and then evolve from there.

Maybe you decide you do want to go Discord, or you want to use primarily Google Docs, or, you know, whatever that ends up being.

We're at least familiar as participants in Flex Weekend with this stack, and it's immediately transferable to your team.

Nice.


SPEAKER_01:
We ask just a yes, no other.

Are you open to having new team members join over the weekend or after really?

Because we know that not everyone's awake at each moment and people might not realize that a team is open, but for teams that signal that they're open to having new members, we really appreciate that so much because that reflects you,

stepping into the gap and allowing other people to rally around your pheromone signal so if you're on the kind of early adopter side of that team formation curve

we encourage you to promote accessibility.

And then if you're on that follower ant side of the curve, just know that there's other teams that are going to be stepping across just like the bridge that we're seeing behind Sid.

And you couldn't have that bridge if there was just one ant.

So you need to have multiple perspectives.

We're not all going to jump onto the dance floor the same moment, but if it's a song you like, go for it and then stay on for the song that you don't like.


SPEAKER_02:
And just consider deep time again, right?

Denchmate Daemon is a team that came out of October, but they've signaled they want new teammates, and they're here now in this cohort, and they've added people to the team that I just saw yesterday.

So this is an ongoing thing, and it's between every six-month weekend hackathon and every monthly heartbeat.

If you signal this, and you can always change it,

close the system that's totally fine but if you signal it's open well there's lots of opportunities for new uh people to to find out about your team and join it or to you to get the skills you may need to expand into yep thanks sean sit yeah like talking about deep time you can also be ants on a


SPEAKER_00:
Because deep time is, I think, where most projects, the longevity of those projects is decided.

So yeah, I would like to pose a question to both of you guys.

So it's a hypothetical scenario.

If you had a choice between unlimited attack points versus unlimited defense points, which one would you, which superpower would you choose?


SPEAKER_01:
My first answer is I'll take whichever one Sean doesn't take.

I was going to take attack, so you can have defense.

What makes you ask, or what do you think that dichotomy, a fun but false dichotomy, offers?


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, yeah, so...


SPEAKER_01:
What, what does it signal about that?

Is it, is it our stance towards skill or what does it mean for somebody?

And yeah, on the team, you might want people who have both.


SPEAKER_00:
I think my voice is chopping up, but if you can hear me clearly.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I got you.

Try refreshing.


SPEAKER_00:
I think the longevity of the project is decided.

Okay.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

I'm going to talk for a second about why I chose attack.

Yeah.

Okay.

Nice.

I think, I think my philosophy is everyone's is, you know, you can stay ahead of the chaos if you are creating it.


SPEAKER_01:
best offense is a good defense best defense is a good offense that's sort of the um that's sort of the non-duality of attack and defense and also uh defense is active in the uh sort of fortress metaphor it's like well let's get those walls shored up let's make sure that we're defending as well as we can but then in active and in distributed environments you actually need to have active defenses

And so it's almost like when we're in a swarm setting, attack and defense start mixing with each other.

Yeah, welcome back, Sid.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so I was getting to a point about anti-fragility and that's where my internet connection went off.

So that's the irony of the situation.

But the point I'm trying to make

The point I was trying to make is that the longevity of the projects is most of the time decided by the indestructibility of the project.

So while you might have someone with a lot of attack points or a lot of enthusiasm at this point in time, what sustains the project through deep time is having at least two members who are ensuring that the project is

in it for the long haul.

So the reason I say this is because if you take any kingdom in history or any long surviving organization in history,

They survived not because of unlimited attack points.

They survived because they were virtually indestructible or they ensured that they were indestructible.

For a modern example, you can take Bitcoin, for example.

There were multiple competitors or alternatives to Bitcoin, but it was designed to be...

indestructible.

So if you are a character which can not be killed, you just need to learn the new tools and then you are as good as your opponents.

But if you have unlimited attack points, all it needs to kill that team is just one single point of failure or one weakness and that could be in a team setting that could be like everyone is busy with their own lives so the project just dies out.

or there's no heartbeat session, so they have no incentive to work ahead on that project.

So you need some sort of anti-fragility in the sense of prolonging that project in deep time.


SPEAKER_01:
Great points.

And also what you said about having like two or more people who will totally hold it down.

We found that to be really critical in several places where like two people entering a team who are actually friends, they side channel, they talk in a different capacity.

that stabilizes, it's like a party where 10 people who don't know each other, okay, it might work, it might not.

But if five couples come together, then you have a sort of multi-level stability that can keep, because it's built upon lower level connections that are not contingent upon the success of the higher level project, it actually allows the project to be successful in a different way.

So back to the form.

Please provide five keywords or phrases describing the problem, tools or ways you're approaching the problem.

And then the second question is provide up to five keywords or phrases describing the stakeholders impacted by the problem.

And to me, this is almost like academia and research versus industry and application, because a lot of times when we approach things as theoretical,

we might be curious about the problem statement or the ways we're going to approach it.

That's like a regular grants application.

But when we think about the stakeholders and the impact on the system, it's not always considered in research questions.

So this is sort of a two stroke engine with learning and doing.

We want to be thinking about what we're going to be doing as a team and the ways that we're framing the problem.

But it's not just about our team's internal understanding of the problem.

it really is important to be considering the stakeholders.

And these are some of the people and some of the groups that you might want to get in contact with as soon as possible, because it's their input that will help you calibrate the project.

We also ask about the ecosystem that your problem is embedded with in, and about a few words to speak a little bit about the attitude and orientation that your team is gonna be taking.

So those are questions about like what your team's perspective is, how is complexity coming into play?

Just what is the question at this early snapshot stage?

So for people who think that, oh, we don't have enough time to come up with five words.

Okay, now just imagine that there's other weekends where they want you to have the final version done.

We're asking for just the V1, V0.1, you know, release draft candidate, whatever you need to put on it so that you just go for it instead of second guessing it being final because don't worry, it's not.

Here's where we get to some logistical details for the weekend.

We ask which representatives, if any, will be available at 2300 UTC.

So it's like, I think 4 p.m.

Pacific on Sunday during the closing ceremony live stream.

we invite you to either record a video so that we can play it lag free and so you can get multiple drafts on the video.

We'll play your video right on the stream, or you can come on the live stream to give the presentation.

But that might be a little bit choppier, just to be fair.

And then also, if we play the video, we can still have you on to ask some questions.

And this is where even if you're the only person on your team,

you can make that presentation and everybody is gonna be watching that.

So it's a great opportunity, whether you have one, two, three, 10 people on your team, you're gonna build momentum and you're going to build documentation when you give that presentation.

And then if somebody tomorrow morning or next week says, what did you do?

What happened?

You can give the timestamp to what you had done with your team

And again, it's just going to be a draft.

No one's going to say, you know, we got together.

It was amazing.

We had three days to work and then we're done.

No, we're not setting up for that.

So you don't have to even frame it that way.

then ask whether and also nobody will ever be required or forced to present on a live stream or to be publicly associated with a project that they don't want to be seen as working with so it's all opt-in with the projects and it's also opt-in with how you want to represent yourself as being associated with the project make sure to express that clearly with your team and

And that's part of that communication and the consent on the project understanding amongst the team members and the motivations.

If someone says, look, I wanna do this and I have five hours a week, but it can't be outside of this team that I'm working on this.

That's fine.

Work it out with your team, sit.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I want to come back to the metaverse point of this because some people may not want to share their public identity.

So the one place where metaverses really shine is where you can be pseudonymous, like you have a pseudonym, or you can be anonymous, like you do not want to reveal even your pseudonym.

So, I think pseudonymous contributions have been gaining a lot of recognition and in the future that we are going towards, pseudonyms, we know people by their pseudonyms and that's already beginning to start through Twitter.

Like most of the Twitter posts

influencers are essentially just pseudonyms.

We do not know who the person behind it, even the creator of Bitcoin, the team behind Bitcoin, Satoshi Nakamoto is a pseudonym.

So I think if that's the style you prefer, it's okay to be a pseudonymous contributor as long as the project moves forward.


SPEAKER_01:
some amazing collaborations uh i've begun connecting with somebody not using my real identity and i would never say something that was unkind even under a false identity or uh not quite a transparent identity because if you do continue that relationship it may come to a point where you do reveal so you kind of got to commit are you going to never reveal this identity or

are you going to act consistent with your broader self so that it could be revealed but just keep in mind that tangled web of identity and um there's a lot of

Probably a lot more that we could all add on that, but it's something that I think we'll all be experimenting with in the coming years.

We then ask whether your team wants any help recording videos.

So my facilitated session is about teaching you two different ways using Jitsi and as well as using OBS for a little bit more customizability so that you can record your own video.

And that's a really great skill to have because being able to record presentations

is something that not every single person in the community needs.

But if we have a critical density of 25% of people, then for any given team of four to six, someone's going to be there to help take that team to the next level.

And again, that's if you want to be playing a video during the live stream.

We just ask whether you're already working with any facilitators, which are just people who are there to help you.

And then we also ask whether there are particular facilitators with a skillset you'd like us to introduce ourselves to, any stakeholders that we can introduce you to, to help you make some initial connections, because there's a lot of people who are from all over the world, so many different sectors.

How do individual teammates learn?

I'll just get to the end, and then Sean, and then a question and chat.

We also have a supporter, which is Wolfram.

And if your team is interested in, well, first off, everyone who's here at the weekend has access to Wolfram for a short period of time.

And just go to the Explore Mathematica channel if you're curious about that.

But also we can provide up to five very generous licenses.

So if your team is even curious about applying this, it would really honor our supporter and be a great catalysis for you as a team to use this.

And then we just have any feedback, any questions at all.

So Sean, and then I'll ask a very nice question from chat.


SPEAKER_02:
Actually ask the question from chat.

I want to go to the team coworking slide to talk about my point.


SPEAKER_01:
Great.

So the question is, tell me why you feel the need for false identities.

Sid, what would you say to that?

Or I'll give a thought.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think I won't call it a false identity.

I'll call it an alternative identity.

So if you have a public image and you can explore other areas of life by having an alternative identity.

So for example, if my day job is in cybersecurity and I want to explore another field in arts altogether, and I don't want these two areas of life to intersect.

So I can just create another identity and live another life essentially.

So I think it just opens up your possibilities to explore more areas and also like start afresh, like start from a

clean slate and just see how people react to it.

And you can always switch to another identity if that's not working out.

So it just frees you from the burden of connecting your work with your identity.

So anything that frees up that burden is a good thing in my books.


SPEAKER_01:
few other points and then we'll go back to the jam board sean so associating your real name with your online activity is sometimes awesome like documenting so that people can find you contact you great but a lot of times you might not want in open spaces your identity to be known it you might not want to be um having some text messages associated to you

not because you're saying something impolite, but it's just the context.

You never know who's watching and there always is watching.

And also like if people can see your name, they may do like searching on you.

So that may put certain people in certain situations at risk.

But even if it's not at risk, if someone is gonna say, oh, well, okay, I'm talking to an insect PhD.

It's like, no, no, no, don't worry.

You're bringing preconceptions about what a PhD is or what entomologists study.

So just...

I just might want to interact with somebody as, you know, ant lover 21 or something like that.

It's just a fun way to share the energy that I would want to bring in a way where there aren't preconceptions and where it can't necessarily be tracked as easily to someone's real identity because finding people's identity and connecting the dots with where they live and all this other information, it's too easy.

so adding a few opaque screens that you're in control of gives you a tremendous sense of agency when you're online because it's like yeah i can go into my virtual box on my operating system log in to this keybase account which has never been connected to anything any of my friends it is just totally separate and then i'm going to be learning in a different area so

It's not for everybody, but it's something that people can be aware of.

And it's a new opportunity in terms of like the last couple of years.

And that's kind of the metaverse.

So let's jump back to the Jamboard.

So Sean, which slide would you like to go to?

14.

All right.

So here we are on 14 with the team co-working slides.

Describe what this is.


SPEAKER_02:
So one of the questions in the team registration form was, let us know if you want connection to any stakeholders or any, I even put like first customer, you know, and

And what this really means is if you think you're developing a product or service that you ultimately want people to pay for, which is great, sustainability, all that is awesome, you're going to need somebody to be your first customer.

And that usually doesn't mean they're actually a customer.

They're more of a partner.

They're more of somebody who's going to work with you to figure out how to make your product and service actually marketable to the next customer.

So that's kind of a certain particular role that many in our cohort could probably connect you to.

So this team coworking space is a specific space.

When you fill out the registration form, you're going to get one of these if you choose.

And it's to the right of the cafe and gather.

And some unique properties of this coworking space are, you know, you get your own shared whiteboard for shared drawing or shared documentation.

I would copy that into a more permanent or persistent Google doc or something just to make sure it doesn't get lost ever.

But it's just a fun way to kind of collaborate.

You've got your own private space.

You're going to be around all the other teams, so it's easy to collide as everyone's starting to work on their presentation and stuff, getting ready for Sunday.

But the thing I really want to articulate right now is that green phone tile.

And this is an external call block.

And it's actually using a platform called Jitsi, which we're using right now to record this live stream.

It's the same thing that's actually in the studio and how we will encourage teams to record using this platform.

But in this instance, in the team co-working space, we're trying to leverage this technology to easily connect your team to anyone outside the cohort.

So if you are working on understanding, for instance, like how a hospital is resilient under the pandemic or just whatever your topic may be, it's important to root any problem you're defining or any solution you're mapping out to stakeholders in the system, people with lived experience in that system that you may not have coming from whatever background or perspective you're in.

So if you are wanting some connection, put that in the team registration form

an organizer or facilitator, we will search our network and try to find somebody today that your team can press X on that call block.

You'll open up a Jitsi window.

It's just a browser-based video chat.

We pass that same URL to the external person and boom, you're interfacing in a video chat and now getting invaluable feedback for your team.

So that's something I would really stress today and I'll be posting about in Keybase and trying to facilitate for anyone who answers that question with a desire for it.

But yeah, that's the only point there.

Do you want to maybe go to 16 and we'll move from there?


SPEAKER_01:
Sounds good.

Here we are on 16.

So it asks, are you looking for team members?

And I'm going to make it a little bit bigger so we can read it.

And there's two sides here in this distributed marketplace, little DeFi for teams.

We have on the left side, our team is missing the following perspectives, skill sets or disciplines.

and so these are post-it notes where take a look at them and if you resonate with that if you think that's me or i know somebody who that could be even if they're outside of our cohort remember the gather and the keybase stay for our cohort but once you make a new gather space once you have a new keybase team or once you use a different platform just it's all good

Complexity weekend is something you can do again and again, but your team has its own vitality and direction outside of our direction or jurisdiction, I guess.

So include anyone else who you see fit to include on your team.

But on the left side, you can see and add post-its related to teams that are actively looking for something specific.

And then on the right side, we see awesome,

post-its, I want to join a team.

So for people who are wondering, how can I join a team or how can we start one?

It's like, if you see one of these post-its on the right side, which are connected with the Keybase identity, then message that person or tag them in a channel because they're on Keybase, they're here right now, they're using our shared documents and they want to join a team.

So that's the best way that we can support each other in a distributed way is when somebody kind of gives that bid, they say, hey, I am interested in governance.

I'm interested in socio-technical systems.

I'm interested in humor and complexity.

Let's support each other by joining that way.

Sid?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I know that this is not a hackathon, but there are certain models in hackathons which I think we can borrow from, which are

provably very successful.

So the idea of pivoting to a different idea, like a different idea altogether is very useful because from all the hackathon experience that I have, we have pivoted at least three times before finalizing on the ultimate pitch that we give.

And the reason we were able to pivot is that an expert just came to our discussion table

and just prove to us that this idea won't work out.

So I think if in the complexity we can model, if some experts in complexity or some enthusiasts can just help the different teams out by periodically checking on them, I think that will help them realize the end goal for their idea and help them pivot to a different idea if needed.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep.

And that's a big point of that team form, because we're going to check in with you once in a while and say, hey, I don't know if you saw this, but there is a heartbeat in three weeks.

You know, the RSVP is here.

Could we do anything to help your team succeed?

Do you wanna have a five-minute spotlight talk where you just say, hey, we had a lot of fun over the weekend, so we haven't met because it's been busy times, but we are still interested.

We have a meeting time in two weeks, so if anybody wants to join, that's all it has to be.

Nobody is judging or...

holding us to a standard of productivity this is all opt-in and so these are the people who you can contact and for those of you who are um not watching this live you're watching it in replay again the jam board is accessible for you as well so how can we include many time zones and many perspectives with transparent communication like this and points of reference so that people know how to contact otherwise it's going to be like the missed connections section on craigslist

anything else to add there Sean or what do you want to do here


SPEAKER_02:
I just posted in general in Keybase.

So this, you know, Jamboard, this entire Jamboard is the same Jamboard we've used for all the middle live streams.

And in the program, we actually linked the URL right next to the live streams.

So it's accessible to everyone.

You know, return to this, look at this.

This is a resource.

And even if you're watching this live stream after the fact, even if it's two months from now, the actual weekend, come back and check in and see if, you know, reach out to people on Keybase that have Keybase usernames and see if that's still the case, if they're interested in working on X or Y

or if you're a team seeking Z, that's something that we can show up for each other using tools like this.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Do you want to stay on 16 or do you want to go to another slide?

Let's go 17.

All right.

So 17 is kind of zooming out one level from the teams to the next level up, which is the community.

So we have this multi-level nesting individuals, and then you have relationships, teams, and projects, and then the community.

And so the community support, again, with the two sides, what can you provide and what are you looking for?

This is where we can just like a community message board, let each other know what we're looking for and what we can provide.

And that's just an opportunity for saying, well, I didn't even know about this skill before the weekend, but now I'm looking for somebody who could help me teach it.

Or this is a skill that's really obvious and everybody has it in my day job, but I'm seeing that there are people who could learn.

in this community this skill or another thing is um several people had pointed out like how can we uh connect people who have generalist skill sets to specialist skill sets so if you can offer feedback say i'm just a person who's learning complexity if you want to use me as a sounding board i'm available for that or i'm looking for somebody to

run my ideas by those are incredibly important and special roles and it's the attention that's so valuable so if you want to be providing feedback or you're looking for feedback then definitely um you can put it here so while people are adding yes okay Sean you added uh Barbara's question so how can you tell an identity you're interacting with isn't a Russian bot I usually don't uh cast shade or dispersion on any national identity but what do you think about that Sean


SPEAKER_02:
I was actually going to direct that to Sid.

I was curious if you have any strategies there just about in this kind of metaverse space where the identities, you're not sure exactly if they are what they're saying or if it's an alternative identity or any of this.

How do you navigate that?

What information do you process to kind of make decisions in that space?


SPEAKER_00:
I mean, there are two ways to look at it.

Either you can go full on game theory with it and see who is winning in that situation, or there's just an intuitive aspect to it.

So as long as you are docs resistant, like nobody can docs you or find your pseudonymous identity on the internet, you are safe.

So in that situation, you have to just focus on your own

own identity, and not worry about the other person's identity, it may it may very well be a bot.

And that may not be even a bad thing.

Like most of the interaction in the future will be bots and humans working together.

So we have to be prepared for that scenario.


SPEAKER_02:
Can you just a follow up?

Can you elaborate what that means to focus on your identity in that relationship?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so if you have your public identity online, then obviously you have to be relatively more careful.

I don't think that's an issue we have to worry about in Complexity Weekend because we all know each other and we are comfortable sharing our cameras and microphones.

So it becomes a concern when you are working on collaborative open source software development or anything involving

large groups of people.

So if you're involved in communities which appreciate anonymity, like the crypto community is an example of that.

Most people prefer to be pseudonymous or anonymous there.

Then it's a wise move to be pseudonymous yourself because otherwise you will have people reaching out to you privately and asking for

favors or something similar.

So yeah, just play by the community's rules.

So in Complexity Weekend, we are okay with sharing our public identities as they are.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, a few points on that.

We never can really know.

For example, there are people in the key base who never posted anything and may have joined Gather or may not have joined Gather.

So we truly don't know.

And when I look at this question, how do we know someone is a Russian bot?

I kind of think it's like insert country of your choice.

because there's many countries and just someone's citizenship or background is never enough to simply know.

And also, as you pointed out, Sid, it's never enough to know if somebody is on the continuum from natural human to human using like a translate, which could be an accessibility issue to somebody who's deployed a series of total text bots.

So on that continuum, I think, you know, if somebody has deployed a bot

that promotes accessibility and complexity education and learning by doing, what else do we need to know?

Their contributions to the commons are positive.

So it's like, it's something where we wanna be careful what information we're sending out and being aware that even though Keybase is like end-to-end encrypted, there might be identities in Keybase that can be taking screenshots or can be pulling information.

And so it's always a very delicate dance, but that's actually where we come to know ourselves perhaps the most is when we're investigating those things, because it really refocuses on the information we put out there and on how we evaluate someone's contributions, whatever their background, and then whether it's a bot or a human.

Sid?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, just one last point on that.

I would say focus on the idea and not the person because people are just embodiments of ideas or ideas are like people are physical embodiments of ideas.

So we are just ideas in a physical form.

So just focus on the idea.

If it's coming from a bot, then just accept it for what it is.

If it's a good idea, it will survive the

It will survive the evolutionary process.

So just focus on the ideas more than the identity of the person creating that idea.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

So that brings us to the end of this live stream.

Sid, thanks so much for joining.

That was super interesting to hear your thoughts.

And thanks again to Sudebi and ProBall for joining earlier.

Let's continue this discussion.

We'll see you on Gather.

And as we head into the last third here, let's get some teams registered.

So if you're not registered on a team, get active on Gather and in the I Need a Team channel on Keybase, and we're going to be there to help you.

So thanks again, and we'll see you soon.