UNKNOWN:
Thank you.

Bye.


SPEAKER_06:
Thank you.


UNKNOWN:
Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Bye.

Bye.

Thank you.

so

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_04:
All right, welcome back to Complexity Weekend, day two.

If you are enjoying that music, be sure to check out the smart URL in the bottom right of the current slide.

Michael Garfield does more than music.

He actually does a lot for the complexity community.

But in this particular role for this conference with the music design,

He actually drew from his roots as an evolutionary biologist and uses a pedal board as an ecosystem of interacting players whose identity emerges out of their relationships.

So if you think that music complexity is pretty cool, be sure to check out more.

So hello, welcome.

We're going to get to the most exciting portion of the second day of Complexity Weekend, which is really locking in the teams.

This is really where we're going to take all the great stuff we learned, all the different diverse perspectives we've really been hearing about, and really put them together into working units that get to work

and make some progress and have an impact during these trying times of this pandemic.

So with that, we'll kick off and we will basically talk about initially some tech tips.

So I'm sure by now you've already realized that you can hit that gear next to complexweekend.may2020 in Keybase and browse all the channels.

You're gonna wanna do that right now if you haven't already.

because there's a ton of Explorer channels.

There's even more that are on the right side of the slide right now than I had originally, because more have been produced.

And if there are some missing still, some topics you really want to dig into and find a team around, be sure to post to hashtag requests, and we will create one as soon as possible.

So join all those Explorer channels that you're interested in.

And at this point in the conference, you should also be comfortable directly messaging people.

You should be directly messaging people who are on your team or you want to be on your team.

You should be directly messaging facilitators that you want mentorship from.

Be totally comfortable with that.

Everyone's doing it right now.

We're all just connecting up.

So just get in the habit of doing that.

And if you've already found your team by this point in the process, we have this bitly here you can go to.

I'll share the slides in KeyBase after.

But in this bitly is actually a Google form that's going to register for the conference your team.

So kind of make it official so we know what you guys are up to.

and how we can help basically, like what areas you need help with, what facilitators you want to talk to.

There's a lot of great stuff in this form.

I'd recommend that you get on a Jitsi call with your team and actually complete the form together because there's a lot of great questions that are going to make you think and really kind of come to a consensus around what exactly you're all working on together.

If you're looking for new teammates, there's a lot of options up until 6 p.m., which is going to be kind of our hard deadline of everyone's on a team.

But really, we'd like people to be on teams earlier than that if possible.

So here are a couple of options if you're still looking for new teammates.

You can follow the brainstorming live stream that will be starting at 3.25 p.m.

Pacific.

We're going to be just going through a lot of interesting, it's very unstructured.

We're just going to be digging around in Keybase, all the different Explorer channels.

We're going to be bringing in facilitators, talking to them.

Just hop on that if you're ever lost and you want to kind of figure out where to go from there.

There's main office hours that will be opening with a lot of facilitators kind of holding up in that room.

And the dynamics can be interesting because you're gonna be able to interact with them with a lot of people, and we're gonna kind of split off from there into other Jitsi calls, which will eventually trickle down into Teams.

And then lastly, just continue discussions in the Explore channels and really try to identify people you're really connecting with and directly message them so that you can really start that Team seed and really lock in a team with that registration form earlier, before six if possible, but six is the deadline.

And with that, I'm going to go ahead and pass it to JP, our fellow organizer.

And take it away, JP.


SPEAKER_05:
Still muted, JP.

Here, buddy.


SPEAKER_07:
Hopefully you can all see me.

And we're back.

I hope you .

Looks perfect.

Good.

All right, so we're gonna be going through our, we've gone through our storming, we're going through our forming phase right now.

So a couple of options for you.

If you get lost throughout all this, or you've actually settled on something, and you would like more of the program, you can join the brainstorm live team, or live stream, excuse me, live team.

You can join the brainstorming live stream where we're going to have, you know, thoughts and ideas with facilitators.

Danny will be there.

Message facilitators directly and all of the information, their expertise are in the facilitator info tab of the program.

If there's somebody who really strikes you as having a skill set that would be conducive towards your research or your work, go ahead and message them directly.

And also, we have the I need a team if you are absolutely kind of still treading water.

So, poster ideas.

Our facilitators will be hosting office hours starting in about an hour, or I'd say an hour and a half from now after our talks.

At complexity, we can office hours here as shown.

And then feel free to utilize the power of Jitsi to just create your own rooms, create your own conference rooms and meet Jitsi slash anything you want and it'll kind of automatically generate a new room.

And one other thing we'll be hosting here,

This brainstorming session, if you still don't know or if you'd like to have a kind of a decompression from this morning's talk, this is unstructured time where basically I'll be hanging out, a couple of other people will be hanging out, and we can discuss what we've learned and hopefully form new ideas going forward from here.

So with nothing else other than that to say, Daniel, you want to take it from here?


SPEAKER_12:
yes thank you um jp and sean we're really excited lunch was kind of the fulcrum where we move from uh talking about the content to really starting to form our teams so sean if you could get monica to join into our chat

while I just review some of this information about team formation logistics.

And Monica is going to be our first speaker for this part of the afternoon.

So just think about which category you're in and how to move from category to category.

If you already know a team that you'd like to join around, then fill out the registration form.

And before you fill it out, we're going to ask you for everyone's KeyBase username there.

Really make sure that you've queried and checked, hey, Monica, to make sure that everybody who you want to include in this team formation is included.

Welcome back, Monica.

Excellent to have you on the stream from now till 2.37.

For the next 30 minutes, we're going to have some Jamboard session with Monica.

I'm going to share the link to that in general, and then we're going to have Monica share her screen and take it away.


SPEAKER_02:
I just muted myself.

Sounds good.

So good afternoon, good morning, good evening, wherever you are in the world.

Great to be back day two, been really catching up on all your conversations online.

And it's been super inspiring to kind of hear some of your questions.

I know there's already a kickstarting, you know, one of the fun thing as we spoke about yesterday, when we were thinking about, you know, we should talk about team development, but

yesterday's conversation was so good so we wanted to build on that and so yes i do have pointers that i could talk and so you know come visit me during office hours i could elaborate a little bit more but i thought it would be more effective if we open this up to the team conversation and so uh take a look if you are here right now join us in the jamboard link because we want to have a conversation with you

to kind of talk about what we can do differently about the team development and so kind of virtual check in.

Can we first acknowledge that great teams can go take us far?

And yet sometimes doing that well takes a bit of a question mark.

And so let's take this time period together to really take a moment to think about what does it mean that I want to have a good team?

What does it mean for me to have a good team experience?

Can we be honest also about what are some trigger points?

Sometimes like for me, for instance, like I know respect is one thing.

And so I think a lot about when I form teams of like, hey, can we go out of the gate and talk about what are the things that we're bothered by?

How do we make sure we're being respectful as well as talking that through?

And so through these conversations, I'm gonna keep sharing some additional points and we're gonna have a lively conversation, but I ask for all of you to join together.

And so with that, I see some of you already here.

Let me get going and share the link so that we can watch this together.

So are we able to see this?

And me as well.

Okay, perfect.

So day two, get started.

And I thought this image was so perfect to visualize.

You know how there's this brief activity where they show that, you know, if you have a long line of individuals, you share one thing.

And when you see what happens at the end of the line, it's completely different when you actually say at the very beginning, which is a small model of showing that communication,

is so important because miscommunication happens all the time, even when the intention is good.

And so let's dive into it and hopefully think about how can we solve complex problems better together when we just met and thinking that through.

So with that, I want to start first checking in with where you are all feeling because I know all of us are kind of in different times.

So some of you, kudos, you've been staying up late and trying to keep up.

Some of you are just waking up or some of you are like you've already been jamming for the past few hours, which is great.

and so if you're on page two with me uh feel free to take a moment and share some of your thoughts you know how is it going how is this going so far maybe some one of your favorites what kind of talks are you liking uh what kind of themes and kind of interests are you seeing so far

And, you know, you've been sharing a lot of different comments in the comment thread and keyword, which is a key base, which is great.

But we'll be curious to hear a little bit more how you're really feeling.

And in the time being, I'm going to have a conversation here.

So, Dan, I'm curious, you know, I've been noticing how you've been commenting and staying up with all these conversations.

Like, how are you actually doing?


SPEAKER_12:
I feel good and excited.

I feel a little bit like a water molecule in a wave.

There's the sort of local vibration, but then ultimately there's a bigger movement that's taking place.

And I'm happy to have some physical support and friendship.

So it really just has been good so far.

And I'm looking forward to see where we go in this next session.


SPEAKER_17:
Love it.

Thank you for sharing that.

And Sean, I'm curious, what has been your highlight so far?


SPEAKER_04:
Just seeing everyone take agency.

That's been the coolest part is just like the facilitators have been awesome, to quote Dan, heroic.

They've just been in there just making stuff happen.

It's been amazing.

The participants have been really kind of feeling the energy and just like getting excited about things and linking up together.

And I think

We're entering the phase now where it's going to get truly magical, where these very diverse perspectives that all got randomized in these workshops and everything can really connect up, find something that they're passionate about, and get going and get to work.

And that is just amazing.


SPEAKER_02:
I love it.

I love it because we're all about action and we've been speaking about it even yesterday as you were all forming and getting to know each other and just joining different groups.

I hope one of the things you're thinking about it, how do I continue to build?

Because as we all spoke yesterday and in many of the talks, this is not just for this next few hours.

It's we're hoping that we look forward to seeing what you continue to build upon.

JP, curious to hear your thoughts.


SPEAKER_16:
What are you most looking forward to seeing more?


SPEAKER_05:
Oh, you're muted.


SPEAKER_07:
I'm still learning how to use this stuff.

Don't feel bad, anybody who's out there who's still working on technology, because so am I. So I'm really excited for people to be inspired and create connections where they didn't expect them to happen.

So I'm looking forward to people kind of like,

having that free space to now create.

I mean, our first section was seeding with some ideas and some commonalities, and now it's really up to everyone else to draw the connections or find their own inspiration.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you for sharing that.

And it's really reflective.

As you are all sharing, we are seeing comments immediately in our little chat in our first questions and just checking in with the community.

A lot of people are saying buzz with the coffee.

Kudos for you.

Some are saying I should go to sleep.

But there is just so much great things happening here.

And just seeing a lot of awesome facilitators.

And I think that's really reflective because every single piece of the puzzle shapes how our experience is.

And that's exactly what it's going to be for you when you form your teams.

Every single individual is contributing, bringing core value, and how you shape that together is going to influence

how you problem solve and what you do, which connects with the, as you continue to share that, I want to now check in with the next question, which is, okay, tell me what are some of the things you love about working with diverse teams?

And if, you know, if I can kickstart, one of the things I love just even doing this is that I get to learn new tools about one thing about innovation is that you're always supposed to be on the lookout to learn new things, grow from it.

But you know, it's,

How am I able to walk my talk if I'm just staying in my own narrow circuits of quote-unquote innovation, if I'm only staying in my own industries, or if I'm not looking to learn something new?

And so what I hope that we can hear more is through this experience, what are new things that you're probably noticing about, wow, this is a powerful reminder of,

why I enjoy working with diverse teams.

And so curious to hear maybe from even our group, I know because you've been bringing together a diverse group of teams, even to put this event together.

And so, you know, checking in with Sean, you know, what's been something that you love the most about working with diverse teams, especially as you're forming this group?


SPEAKER_04:
Well, as like, I guess, a generalist, like I just love learning.

And anytime I join a team, it's a diverse team in the sense that they have something I don't know.

And I just love being able to see it in action in a way that I could never do, be able to kind of absorb that, and then really find the different mindsets it takes to truly make an impact.

So diversity is just, it's key to any team.

I think really, if you don't have a diverse team, you're just kind of a handicap team, basically.

Like it's just necessary.


SPEAKER_02:
And that brings to a lot of different perspectives because we're already seeing working with all different ages, really surrounding your with yes and vibe.

And that's absolutely one of the key things that you're gonna notice as you form your teams.

And so I'm gonna continue to build on and continue to share your comments there because

I want to think about how do we make sure we express how we appreciate one another, because that's actually at times a challenge when we all are different.

I think two of my favorite things that I often think about is strength binder and actually love language.

And I know sometimes we're like, we love language.

I thought that was only for romantic cases, but like, no, it's at the essence, it's really talking about how you feel appreciated as a person.

So for some people who is word of affirmation, if you don't get the,

word of compliment they are not going to feel included or they're going to feel like I did all this work for nothing where's my compliment and so you know maybe right now as you're forming team it might feel awkward to say okay what is your love language or what is your strength finder it might not come across you might not say it in that way but what are other ways that you can make sure that you're

Making sure you check in with your teams.

Are we making sure we value everyone's opinion?

Are we making sure that everyone feel appreciated and being respected in that way?

So Dan, curious to hear your thoughts.

What are some ways that you check in with your team to make sure they feel appreciated in the work they collaborate?


SPEAKER_12:
It was a funny parallel to draw with the love languages because it makes me think of the often explored relationship between a PhD and a marriage as far as beginning with a proposal, etc.

There's really something to be said for the long-term relationships that we are forming.

about the way that long-term relationships, especially when they're across time zone or across people's perspectives, it's really important that there's active listening and an active relationship that's always being checked up on.

And some people want a lot of checkup in the relationship, other people don't.

There's just as many kinds of friendships as there are romantic, as there are scientific interactions.

It's all about coming to know how your collaborator or how your team will become appreciated and allowing the space and the vulnerability so that your teammates can tell you what they need and that you can just go from there.


SPEAKER_02:
Absolutely.

Guys, if you were listening, one of the key things to be able to do all of what was just shared is really active listening because I can do all the talking I want.

But how will I be able to solve complex problem when we need different people with different perspectives actually really being heard and appreciated?

And if I'm just focusing on, okay, I'm going to focus on what I'm going to say next.

I'm not going to care about what Don is saying or Sean is saying or JP is saying, then how am I actually able to

Fully create a space where everyone is feeling fully present, being honored, appreciated.

And so active listening.

And I love some of the comments that are built here because, you know, at thinking of both long term and short term to create that.

And, you know, HR language, we say psychological safety.

Yes.

Smiles help, too.

I mean, really thinking about what are things that make you feel encouraged when you show up?

whether it's virtual or in person.

And I think that's sometimes the baby step I noticed that is helpful to think about what helps me in finding others to how they can be appreciated as well as what I can do.

to make them feel appreciated.

And so maybe in the chat, that's like, hey, that's great.

Thumbs up, giving that little emoji.

Or maybe it's just making sure, you know, I appreciate this opinion.

Can I build on this?

And building on that.

And so, but to continue on, I want to talk about now the next question because it is not easy.

I'm going to admit, right?

I think all of us are learning additional skill sets under our belt on top of everything that we spoke about because now we have to do this online.

And I get it.

Some of you are online masters and like, Monica, no, I've, I got this.

I've already been doing this for years and you know, but when the world goes through this, such a change in, as we're diving into all these complex challenges, we're not just thinking about how we solve this problem together, but what you're probably thinking through is like, how is the problem we're solving?

Thinking about our customer, which is a business aspect to always think about a customer's way of how they have to navigate that communication.

let's say a solution that you're working for your transportation audience it's one thing that that's great now you know they're going to be safe when with this whatever solution that i have we're going to make sure that it gets from this supply chain to that but how is that conversation and communication approach actually making all stakeholders feeling included appreciated feel like they have a value as well as

have actual digital literacy that is making it fair.

And even in this setting, we know we're thinking about different time zones.

And so I wanna check in, JP, I wanna hear from your thoughts, even just from this event and maybe just in the past few months, what are some new things that you noticed that is trickier than you thought to navigate online versus doing something in person?


SPEAKER_07:
That's a nice question for me because I'm very much an in-person person to begin with.

I really believe in the space of, in the creative space, like stochastic meetings and in the city science, city sciences literature, you know, people are fans of like randomly meeting somebody on the subway and that creates, you know,

generates creativity and therefore it shows up in patents at the end of the day in our data.

So that said, I'm really appreciating the online space being able to communicate direct ideas and being able to kind of have this working active memory, if you will.

So even on our whiteboard jam board right here, you know, we're creating this kind of

permanent mind.

So instead of just like your chance meeting, we have a record of everything.

I think that's really, really special.

Everybody can see it as well.

So that's the other really valuable thing.

We don't have, you know, the deep siloing that we would get otherwise.

So it's intended to like, everything is kind of kept above, above the table.

So everyone sees what everyone else is doing.

I think that's a really, really neat space to be.

I'm looking forward to seeing, you know,

groups of 10 or 15 or 20 people combined like we had on the online town.

I think that's a really fun space too.

So it's definitely coming together in the online space for me.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you for sharing that.

You've answered my next question, which was, despite that, what are the positives?

And which you have acknowledged, right?

Because that's part of the thing is that I think it's really important for us to always see with the lens of what are the pros and cons?

Because I think when we are able to see it

with that open perspective, we are more likely to see, okay, the cons, okay, technical challenge, okay, I see it, but what can I do with it?

Instead of like, oh my gosh, I don't know what to do with this technical challenge.

And then, you know, I'm gonna continue to be stuck because that's the view that I'm going into.

openness right okay well this is so transparent i can see amazing insights and we're collaborating together in this process is making me think about well can we do this yes and could we explore doing this and building on that which is the exciting piece and so i already love you know even in this natural conversation we had to come

opinion being split you know let's talk about what are the things that are trickier and easier to navigate and that is absolutely powerful to think about i want to circle back you know sean curious to hear your thoughts what are some other patterns that come to mind even just with this experience that you're seeing


SPEAKER_04:
I really think this format that we've kind of struck on together is really great for problem solving imbued with like complexity thinking, because for everyone who's probably experienced what I'm experiencing right now, I mean, you're just so tied in to the key base kind of back end.

I just feel so connected to everyone.

I can immediately just go between threads and I'm just the amount of information being shared is incredible right now.

And I think you just don't get that in person and in-person conferences.

You're sitting there in a room.

You might bump into someone around the water and just talk a little bit.

But it's not the rate at which we're sharing things right now.

And I think that's just so critical to really break down these barriers between these different perspectives and disciplines and whatnot so we can really find the novel boundaries between them where there's a lot of great work that could get done.

So it's all fit perfectly into what we're trying to do and view complexity into problem solving.


SPEAKER_02:
absolutely and you know how a reflection of the reality it is because

Sometimes my best friends are people I met in the coffee line.

Sometimes there are people that I was having a random chat conversation.

And in a way we are organically trying to create as many random scenarios that you bump into somebody.

Hey, I noticed, I noticed, I did you read that person who wrote details in that?

I loved that.

I also agree.

And now it becomes a whole different conversation.

And so I'm hoping that through these different approaches that we are co-creating through this experience, you are able to find different ways to add and connect in different aspects because

that's how you'll build new teams.

That's how you're going to be reminded of, Ooh, I want to build on this new idea to think about how I problem solve this in a different way.

Dan, yes, please.


SPEAKER_12:
Yep.

One thing that's really interesting.

And I really, I love the fact that there's two sides to every coin and there's so many things that we might long for in this moment to be able to have the nonverbal communication and to be able to have these instantaneous conversations.

But again,

For me, I try to relativize our current experience, not to all of us in a room together in San Francisco, because that's realistically not going to happen in any situation, 2020 or otherwise.

This exact set of people simply couldn't or wouldn't have been assembled except online.

So I think, okay, the alternative is just that I'm not having the interactions.

And so all the interactions are really special.

And it's also, it's yes and there's challenges.

And so the yes and isn't always like up and up.

Sometimes it's up and down and it still is within the improv mindset, you know, comedy and tragedy, the two masks.

So it's just that we can wrap all of our challenges and our technical learning and the issues that are our fault or not our fault or whatever.

We can wrap that up within the recognition that we wouldn't even be able to bond or to have these connections if it weren't for having online tech.


SPEAKER_02:
Absolutely.

Thank you for highlighting all of that.

And we're already seeing, you know, just acknowledging the pros and cons.

I love the comment about what is easier is that great for introverts and smaller group conversations.

I would say in a way, this is a powerful way that, and traditionally, while I love in-person and as, you know, folks who heard me yesterday, I do a lot of workshops and speaking in person pretty much weekly, not just doing weekly virtually, which is a different experience, but

You know, I miss that in-person touch, that energy that you get when you interact with people.

But the thing that I'm also loving is that traditionally, if I wanted to have a dialogue like this, I would have to wait.

Okay.

Yes.

Yes.

Would you like to share an opinion?

Okay.

Okay.

Nice person.

Right.

But now we have 20 people speaking at the same time and we can still have a conversation, which is so fun.

powerful and so I cannot wait to see how with our openness exploring mindset as we talked about yesterday to build on all these elements and think about ooh what kind of problem would I want to solve how can I bring value to this team how would I stay open-minded what new things can I learn and contribute and build on those elements and so I say think about kind of the business elements in the team formation a few additional thoughts that I want to add you as you continue to build on this is just

The first few times I think when I even did things like start a weekend or even my business and forming teams with strangers, I found that there were a couple of things that was really helpful.

And those are the tips I want to add to our conversation, which is one at the beginning.

Just just start with basic intro, please, because sometimes we're like so excited, like, oh, my gosh, guys, let's talk about transportation or like let's talk about education.

And we just talked for 20 minutes and then we forget.

Wait.

So wait, Sean, where are you from again?

Or like, wait, JP, wait, where are you?

Oh, OK, dad.

OK, that's your expertise.

OK, because sometimes when we forget to do that, we skip a mile.

So please just take a moment when you are in a room.

Just say, hey, can we just do a quick round of intros?

Name, location.

Yes, everyone has a long resume.

So just something briefly.

Name, location.

Just briefly some of your expertise and what you're passionate about.

and where you can bring value another way as you continue to build your team to kind of do a good check-in is uh simplify things such as ask and give hey i need help in x and but i can give you help in y you know try to simplify in those simple terms yesterday i told you about i noticed and i wonder keep using that in regards to when you see disagreements among teams

Oh, Dan, you know, I noticed that when you say that expression, can I understand a little bit more what you mean?

And then Dan might share like, oh, Monica, this is actually when I'm like, oh, OK, we're on the same page.

Then thank you.

Not to call you out.

Just as an example, right?

And then it's like, oh, I wonder, Sean, you know, when we talked about this, is this where we were heading?

Or like, can I add this to this contribution?

And now hopefully if Dan and Sean can agree, if I said something like that in this practice scenario, it doesn't come across as like, what is wrong?

Like, why don't you agree with me, right?

Yes, no, yes, okay.

So yes, thank you.

And so phrases and languages play a powerful role, especially when we spoke about how miscommunication happened.

The third tip that I want to add is just take a moment as you're having that conversation and brainstorming.

If you're noticing that somebody is kind of over dominating, how can you make sure that it becomes a dialogue, not a monologue?

Dialogue versus a monologue.

Because it's supposed to be a team effort.

And yes, there are different personalities.

There's also language.

There's also time zones.

Hey, some people are staying up late.

So that's the reason why they might be quieter than usual.

So if somebody is noticing that, can you just take the courage and say, hey, guys, I don't think we heard from that person over there.

Hey, how are you feeling right now?

What's your thoughts?

Everyone can step in to make sure everyone is heard.

And then through that, what I hope you quickly take the next step, which is advice for is find clarity and where everyone can have a little bit of ownership and clarity and responsibility.

So maybe it's something like, oh, wait, we know that based on that, you know, it looks like JP's expertise is like X, Y, Z. JP, would you mind taking charge of that?

Or like JP might say like.

Hey, actually, I like doing this.

Can I take charge of this part?

And Sean might be like, OK, then I'll take care of this.

And then that way, it's not somebody delegating or ordering.

It's now co-owned and shared.

And I know that's something that I was a little sensitive because, you know, we have different personalities and how we express how we we don't want one or two people feel like they own the project.

And it's rather co-created.

I want to check in with the group here.

Is there any other advice that you would share based on what I shared as we wrap up?


SPEAKER_12:
One thought just from the academic experience is when a group that's forming starts talking a lot of detail about who's going to be the author, who's the first author, are we going to have four or five?

And the discussion, it's kind of like talking about splitting the profits before you've even made the product.

and so not that it's unimportant who the authorship uh goes to or the ordering it's that by the time that discussion becomes relevant for your group about who's what rule formally if you get that far down the road and we really hope to take you to the end of the road with our facilitators

it will be a much clearer decision.

And so you can always just, if you recognize some sort of unhealthy ownership dynamic, you can often just bring it back to the project, bring it back to the people whose lives are influenced and just say, let's just figure out the best way to go about doing this with the people who are really interested in solving this right now.

And then in a few weeks, if we have a minimum viable product, it'll make a lot more sense who's the, you know, this or that of engineering.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you for saying that.

And for those who are newer to, oh, now I'm unmuted.

So thank you for sharing that because for those who are new to the term MVP, the Minimum Viable Product, it basically means like a, you know, the most simplest term that you can test to show what your product solution looks like to solve a specific problem.

Maybe for some that's actually the paper, maybe for some that's a paper document that shows this is how it's gonna work or a website or a tool.

but it's going to take time um and i hope you're noticing that the reason why we're taking time talking about this is that it is hard as you have expressed here and so if at any point you feel stuck we're here we we want to help you through that um and so as you get ready to continue to build on this i want to just add on two quotes uh as we wrap up this part of the conversation which is if you want to speak i saw your hand raised i wanted to see oh yes


SPEAKER_07:
Oh, I also thought you were going to say something, Sean.

But one other thing from a complexity standpoint around team formation is I really believe in the idea of cross-pollinating ideas.

And to that effect, take a break once in a while.

I mean, if you're really diving in and you're really deep, you know, you're really, really cramming down into something,

pace yourselves, take a break, go to online town, go to a general Gen Z chat.

Just kind of mix it up with other people in the environment as well, especially in the online space, because it's really, really easy to get siloed in something.

And for me,

what I'll say like organizationally, that's when a lot of ideas get really well cross-pollinated.

Somebody has this really deep idea and maybe an entire team has this really deep idea, but where you want to work in the space is taking this idea and then suddenly you meet another group with another idea and click, you have something that works really, really well for both of you.

So that's especially encouraged in this space with as many people as we have and in the complexity mindset we have is,

Talk to each other, not just in isolation or not just one-on-one, but don't be afraid of large groups.

Don't be afraid of self-organizing your own meetup this evening sometime if you find Jitsi works better for you.

Whatever tools work well for you is fair game.

Just whatever you're comfortable with.

Take a percolation methodology or a percolation model to your creativity.

If something isn't working, move to the next thing, and eventually you'll get it.


SPEAKER_04:
The Plinko model.

I have a little bit of advice I actually want to give to you, and this will actually harken back to a lot of your experience, Monica, with Startup Weekend.

Complexity Weekend draws inspiration from Startup Weekend in certain dimensions.

One of them that I really want to bring in from Startup Weekend is this, quote, get out the building.

In Startup Weekend context, you're trying to build a company.

This is a different context.

But the idea is don't just sit there with your team building a business inside the building during the whole weekend.

get out of the building and go talk to people who are going to be your potential customers and get their feedback.

We have that in our community guidelines,

talk to stakeholders, right?

That's the equivalent for us, which is like, if you're going to build some solution around a new ventilator or some way to get PPE distributed where it needs to go, talk to the nurses, get on a call Sunday morning.

I want to see calls Sunday morning that team set up tonight with stakeholders that they can get real input and don't just intellectualize the problem, right?

It's not just your team and making sure your team has a lot of insights and diverse perspectives.

It's

that boundary between the environment and your team and crossing that and getting that information into your team too.


SPEAKER_02:
Absolutely.

Den, was there anything else that you wanted to add?


SPEAKER_12:
Yep, I just wanted to address one last point from the chat before we transferred to the next talk.

Somebody wrote, I did not fully understand how to be involved in a team.

Should I have a specific topic or idea to make a team?

So the first thing is a claim that we can make from Friday night to Sunday night, which is the organizers and the facilitators are there for any question, whether you're an individual who wants to find a team or whether you're a team that wants to take it to the next level.

Right now, at this moment, literally at 2.36 p.m.

PST, we're going to hear from two more talks from our facilitators.

Those will be the last bits of content that everybody hears together.

And then at that point, we're going to have a little bit of a choose your own adventure.

So adventure A is if you're already in one of these subchannels,

and you think that you have a question in a team that you'd like to get into, you can then go to the Bitly link, the registration form, and make sure that your team gets registered, which will help us do two things.

It's going to help us make sure that every Keybase username gets on a team, and it's going to help us as facilitators make sure that your team gets visited and revisited so that we can make sure to take your team to the next level.

And if you're not ready to form a team at 3.30 p.m.

in one hour from now, it's going to be totally fine.

This live stream is going to keep on going and we're going to have a bunch of different facilitators just rotating through.

We're going to have all kinds of conversations about complexity with an eye towards getting people who want to find that team for them onto the right team.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you for highlighting that.

And as you know, the reason why we're taking the time going, talking through this is because there's some stuff that needs to be taken before even to think about what team.

going to join in how we're going to work through and so i hope these points have been helpful and you know just to add again on the last point to think about how do we make sure that we're working together to inspire one another and challenge one another in a positive way um we don't want to just say yes yes you know yes men approach in that you know every yes and in that it could support one another to build on but we don't just want to see any no challenges in a group you know you feel like you disagree with an opinion

discuss hash it out you know if you have a perspective because that's actually where the difference of opinion would grow into something new that might not have been found in some simply just because somebody said you know let's do green let's do green green is the color that we're going to do for a company and that's the solution but if you think that it needs to be yellow it needs to be blue you know share it and then you'll be able to decide maybe it's green maybe it's pink maybe it's something else and so whatever that solution is you know

continue to build a space you can collaborate on.

Some of the tactical things will continue to work together as we all shared, but we hope that these are tips that now will give you perspective in how you can lift yourself up, but also lift others through this process and just have fun.

As I said yesterday, this is all about having fun through problem solving because there's so much to solve and we want to be intentional about it.

So with that being said, thank you all for joining us in and we look forward to being there and talking more.

So thank you.


SPEAKER_12:
Thank you, Monica.

You can depart the live stream.

So I'm happy to introduce our next speaker, who is Jason Larkin, PhD.

Jason is a research scientist at Carnegie Mellon University's Emerging Technology Center, and he's also a co-founder of PhD Mentors.

He is actually going to do his talk in a little bit of a different way.

He wanted to make sure, even though he's here live in the chat, that there wasn't going to be any issues with bandwidth.

So what I'm going to do is I'm going to share his talk, which he just recorded a few minutes ago.

And then in general, as well as in Explore Health, we're going to continue the discussion.

And Jason is going to be there to answer any questions.

So I'm just going to go right to the talk.

Thank you, Jason.


SPEAKER_01:
Hi everyone, I'm Jason and I had to record this because I think this is the only way I can deliver the talk reliably.

Sorry I can't do it live, but I'll be in the chat monitoring the response.

So I want to talk today about mental health and also about some of the effects that COVID is having on it or will have on it.

From a mental health perspective, I have my own experience with it.

And also the company that I co-founded with Sean, who's one of the organizers, phdmentors.org.

It has a significant amount to do with mental health, in particular the mental health of PhD students and of people in academia in general.

So the company was founded basically to try and address this problem, the well-documented problem, mental health issues of PhD students.

So I have this contact with the space.

And from it, I think we can glean a very important principle, which is that it's very important to seek professional help.

Or the definition of professional can be a little bit loose, but essentially this is because you yourself are not completely aware of what you're up to, quote-unquote.

where you is like your executive function and thought, and the rest of you is the rest of your lower-level brain function.

And I think we only get to tap into a small amount of that at any given time, but over time we can detect patterns and we can get a better understanding of what our total brain is up to, our total thought process.

I have a lot of interesting references on this topic, but it's a very fascinating space.

So, this is why it's important to get somebody else and ideally, you know, several other people as sources of quote unquote professional help.

So, these can be mental health professionals, which you might be able to find in mental health centers provided by your institution.

Now, we have the rise of online applications of things like Talkspace, which seem like they're particularly important during COVID.

And also those that are close to you in your life, because of their closeness, they have certain domain-specific knowledge about you.

And don't be afraid to seek the opinions of all of these sources.

I think that's the point.

A really clear picture of you and your mental health will not come into focus until you've sourced a variety of opinions and viewpoints.

So my particular mental health background, I'm a diagnosed manic depressive bipolar, and not just diagnosed, but also observed over a long period of time, and also with a family history.

of the illness.

So it's a mixture of innate and nurtured factors, and it's really a collection of data over a long time period, over observation of pattern of behavior, which start to form a clear picture about your mental health.

And this is true also in my mentorship experience and experience in general with human beings.

In some sense, it really is a data problem.

You're not truly aware of what it is you are from a mental health perspective until you've gathered a lot of data across a wide variety of dimensions.

Maybe one principle overall is that you can glean from all of this, from variation in people and background and all that, is that it seems like meaning, in quotes, provides mental health robustness.

That is, what is the definition of meaning?

it has different forms for different people, many different forms perhaps.

But one way of looking at this would be to ask, does it?

Are there that many different ways of looking for meaning?

I think this is due to a conflation often with happiness, which is easier to measure on a short time scale.

But real meaning is what provides long-lasting satisfaction, not just happiness.

This is in like the Aristotelian, Aristotelian

and even Buddhist conception.

And really, so to understand this, this takes time to collect the data, so to speak.

That is the observation of your patterns and behaviors, your motives and so forth.

A counter point would be to say that meaning can be condensed down into as simple as family, faith, community and vocation and vocation to

differentiate between occupation solely.

Again, this is coming from quite an old viewpoint.

In this context, one can think about these four simple things, and then in times of stress, one can perform, say, triage and risk management and ask the questions, what do I need, rather than what I think I need or what I maybe more want.

And this compression down to a small number of items can help to alleviate anxiety because it simplifies the space of unknown in whatever's going on in your life.

So I know this was noted in the pre-survey for the

But one of the pillars or one of the proposed pillars of foundation for meaning is vocation.

And again, to distinguish this between occupation, COVID is having a heck of a time, heck of an effect on unemployment.

um you know for 30 to 40 million people this is nursing essentially uh great depression levels of unemployment in terms of percentage and perhaps also in terms of outlook um again to distinguish between um vocation or advocation the difference between what you have to do what is meaningful uh there's a lot of disruption happening here

And the disruption is not contained to just these 30 to 40 million people unemployed, but also in the crowd that is in attendance from academics, academia and industry, the high school labor market, you're seeing the effects of COVID and the effects on the uncertainty that this is introducing into the job market.

And of course, we can sort of scale these things.

So for 30 or 40 million people, this is like a Great Depression-level type of impact.

For all of us, there's a strain and a stress.

And then for some, the largest inconvenience is what to do for lunch.

But I think this is what you have to do for a lot of issues, including mental health, is that oftentimes, to save your mental health, your perception plays a gigantic role

in your assessment of threat and your response.

So just something there to put the scale of things in perspective.

I think also what COVID is making all of us ask is, again, what is this difference between occupation and vocation or advocation, which seems to be at odds with each other, at least pre-COVID and in the workplace in general.

Another one of the pillar aspects, your family or community, COVID again is stressing this dimension, in particular with the shelter-in-place protocols and procedures that we're doing, have been doing and are likely to have to continue.

One way to look at this would be like, I myself am a hyper extrovert.

So I went into the situation having low expectations or just expecting there to be an extra stress on that dimension.

But it's also not...

It's also we can see COVID having these empty promises, so to speak, like what would have previously been considered a potential positive externality.

Let's say for introverts, they're actually having their lives maybe disrupted just as much as the extroverts in this situation.

And then we have the outlook in terms of job function and how we're going to work.

And already we're seeing a lot of the tech companies plan for long-term work from home, which as a positive is showing us all, oh, yeah, I guess we didn't have to go into work as much as we were, and a lot of those meetings weren't necessary.

But the long-term effects and impacts, it's hard to say.

We've never run this experiment.

So I think this is a very interesting point of focus that we could work on.

I want to comment about anxiety in general.

So COVID is introducing a large number of various anxieties, especially because it's introducing a bunch of unknowns into our worldview and so forth.

But one principle seems to be that in general, anxiety is alleviated by voluntarily confronting the source of anxiety rather than being forced or pushed.

It's fundamentally a different pattern of brain, of circuitry and so forth.

And the outcome is not a reduction in fear, but an increase in courage.

And I think what's interesting to note is that courage can also be boosted by attachment to meaning.

That is, for a given amount of, let's say, fear risk assessment, one typically has more courage, the more meaningful the goal is.

And it's interesting to note that right now what's more interesting than understanding all this complex phenomena from first principles

Furthermore, what's more meaningful than responding effectively to COVID?

I think this is correlated highly with the fantastic turnout that I think a lot of people are finding great meaning in this.

Okay, so to shift a little bit is to recognize that mental health is a complex system.

So I mentioned briefly about how it's, broadly speaking, a mixture of innate and nurtured behavior.

But of course, it goes much deeper than that.

But in a complex system, what we often want to do is to find some core principles and find some principles that are going to work in a broad context so that we can establish the sort of foundation.

And what's often very nice in complex systems are first,


SPEAKER_14:
Live streaming is on.


SPEAKER_01:
And some principles that are going to work in a broad context so that we can establish this for a foundation.

And what's often very nice in complex systems are first simple principles that yield big output or big outcome.

So, for example, something as simple as a combination of regular physical exercise in various forms, combined with proper sleep and sleep scheduling, that alone sort of gives, if one does those things, gives an automatic mental health improvement.

And this has been shown in a number of studies.

I can provide a lot more references than these, but I'm just giving you some examples of where the current research is at.

So in the context of what I mentioned before about triage and risk management in the face of adversity, you love a freebie, so to speak.

That is something that can be done and done rather easily and is going to have an automatic or a near guaranteed benefit and outcome.

So I think regular physical exercise and activity, and this has many different forms, the definitions vary, is one of those freebies.

Looking a bit closer now, there's another few freebies we can get out of the system.

That is, as a mental health system, a physiological system, the person in question is also, their mental health depends quite significantly on what it is they eat, their nutrition, their diet.

This is research which is connecting your gut biome, your gut health,

to your mental health state rather directly.

For example, bad diet inducing depression or the mitigation of depression via improvement in diet.

So here again is sort of another freebie, a sort of good diet, and the caveat here is that a good diet is highly person specific, a lot like mental health and other aspects of health.

But it's another one of those, if you get it right, then this is sort of automatic mental health improvement or boost.

So we'll take any freebies we can, I think, in a system which is demanding that we sort of triage and assess the system from a risk management perspective.

But again, like I said, like other aspects of health, this is highly a person-specific, and so it takes really a holistic approach, which includes diet, nutrition, most aspects of physiology, and what are their effects on your psychological, emotional state, and so forth.

And for all this, I like to rely on a group of experts, which I've sampled from over the years.

A really great resource is Dr. Rhonda Patrick.

She's got a PhD in neuroscience, but she has a very broad understanding of all the topics we've been discussing.

And she runs a really great website and has a YouTube channel with a lot of great content.

I highly recommend her.

Also some other names, and I can provide more if you want them.

Just one more topic here, because I want to make sure I end with enough time to spare.

is sort of in a similar way to what is your actual diet.

You can think about what is your attention diet, you know, what is your diet of what you pay attention to.

These aspects have also been noted in terms of mental health.

Just one example of this would be Tristan Harris, who used to work at Google but broke off to go form a, I think it was a non-profit, to attack the issue of the...

perversion of capital incentive to capture attention, not necessarily towards the promotion of mental health.

Not sure if that's the best way to say it, but Tristan is a good example of this.

And I think metaphorically speaking, you can think about it in terms of like, you know, your information diet or your attention diet.

We can certainly include that into the system.

Because already we have quite a number of variables here, including what are your innate or genetic, epigenetic inherited traits?

How do those manifest in the particular environment?

behavior, which you raised.

This environment has a lot of different factors.

So yeah, so I think the question here would be what would you like to focus on for this session?

There's a lot of stuff we could.

We could say focus on what is an individual's mental health.

That could be the mental health of the participants.

It could be focusing on what are the very needs of each individual person with mental health.

It could be to work with tools or to think about new tools that could help mental health.

in particular with COVID-specific things.

But I think what's also nice is that humans are complex systems, a complex system, and many of us are many complex systems.

But we're also comprehensible.

So I think this is like at the core of the rest of complexity science, where very complicated systems are nevertheless comprehensible.

And also, I'd like to say I have a lot more references than the ones I share in these slides.

And we could consider a lot more aspects of mental health and in particular with COVID if we have some more specificity.

But yeah, I should cut it off here.

And thanks for listening.


SPEAKER_05:
Hi, everyone.


SPEAKER_12:
Welcome back.

So that was very nice by Jason.

And just for bandwidth issues, again, we're not going to have Jason in here live.

He's active in the chat.

So please continue to ask your questions in the Explore Health section.

Please continue to ask those questions in the Explore Health area, and we'll be sure to get to them.

People really wrote some beautiful pieces, and also I'd like to second that appreciation for touching on this serious topic and also showing that beyond the quantitative and the qualitative, there's the human, and you really brought that together.

So thanks so much, Jason.

I'd like to introduce our next and our final speaker, who is Jared Thompson.

Jared is a senior machine learning engineer at Atomwise and was one of our speakers and our facilitators last year at Complexity Weekend.

So Jared, thanks so much and please take it away.


SPEAKER_09:
Great.

Thanks for having me, Dan.

So let's go ahead and share my screen here.

You'll have to forgive me.

I'm having to give my presentation from inside the car.

My daughter won't leave us alone.

She loves to be around me.

I'll turn on my camera.

All right.

So I know that many of you are very tired.

A lot of people are really excited.

But I'd like to just take a moment right now to just try to calm down, focus a little bit.

We're just going to think for a few minutes about different project ideas.

Jason has presented you with some.

Monica's had a fantastic presentation about how to collaborate together.

So I just wanted to take this time to inspire you to take a little action and offer my opinion for what it's worth on meaningful project suggestions and starting points.

I'm going to present to you a standard mental technique

that is common in complexity science, as those who practice it do.

And at the end of this, I'll try to do a little presentation on what is known as agent-based modeling, which is a computer technique.

I won't be able to do much other than just a quick example.

We'll talk a little bit more about that in a few minutes.

I do want to say before I begin my presentation that I'm not covering any topic exhaustively here.

This should not be a very dense presentation.

And I am not a professor of economics.

Mike Zargum more is.

So if you have deep questions about economics, you can pepper him.

Before we get started, I wanted to just present with you this idea as a project idea.

This doesn't fit in the rest of my presentation, so I thought I'd just put it up here in the front.

The question is, why have some countries fared better?

If you click on this link, which I'll provide to you, you can see down here at the bottom of the screen that goes to the World Health Organization.

I'm not going to click on it here because I don't have two screens right now.

Some countries have done much worse in terms of infection rate and mortality.

And I'm providing you with some hypotheses that you could test using data free from me.

I'll give these slides to you guys.

You can look through them.

I have noticed that colder and drier countries have an advantage and less populated and less industrial countries on the general have an advantage.

More authoritarian and more militarized countries have an advantage.

And interestingly, more ethnically homogenous countries have an advantage.

Now, there are exceptions, a couple notable ones.

For example, Lebanon seems to have done very well, and so has China.

And Lebanon is neither cold nor dry.

The same can be said of most of China, although China is a huge country, so the mileage may vary.

And what would be useful here in terms of a project output

would be a report examining correlates of these hypotheses or any others you may come up with, offering some reasoning and further testable scenarios.

And I would argue that as a product of this conference, a quality report examining this data would be useful to everyone and would be a great showcase and a generator of further community action.

So moving on from that, I'd like to talk about my main topic.

It says part one here.

I don't know if I'll ever get to give you part two, but we'll just talk about part one, which is that I'd like to think about, or invite you to think about, the realities of a post-COVID future.

And I think that most of my thesis is contained within this graph.

Jason in his previous lecture described the current state of Western economies as being like a recession.

Here looking at this graph, we see initial weekly employment claims on the Y axis and time plotted from the year of 1971 to today on the X axis.

As you can see, each one of these peaks here

represent what is officially agreed to as a recession.

Now, that isn't all that's here, though, because in these boxes that I've highlighted, these are actually the real recessions, at least in the United States, and I could cleanly argue most of Europe, with the exception of the Scandinavian countries and Switzerland for the most part, fall within these boxes as being the real recessions, right?

These are cases where

These economies were not generating many jobs.

Many, many people were out of work despite the nature of the unemployment claims.

And there was much discussion about this in the media.

Okay, so we've got a few recessions here.

And now look at today.

This is, this peak right here on the right side of the graph is today.

That's how many unemployment claims have happened

just in this part of the year.

What you are looking at is a monumental fundamental change in the economic reality of the entire Western Hemisphere.

And although maybe some banking people might say this can somehow be covered up, I'm wondering if the numbers really roll that way.

There have been a lot of people, at least in the United States, talking about a revolution since Trump got in.

I won't comment too much on that.

But I would argue that a revolution may have arrived whether or not anybody asked for it.

Because this indicates that something is going to have to change.

And

Before we continue on, I'd like to take a minute and ask, why did this terrible thing happen?

Why are unemployment claims multiple orders of magnitude greater than anything that we've seen before?

The media has sensationalized this for a multitude of arguments I won't cover.

And we've heard claims that it's anything from the spiritual energy of people

to the dirtiness of animals.

I've read articles on capitalism, sexism, racial capitalism, and even a few on conspiracy.

Needless to say, I'm not buying any of these being the cause of the economic crisis.

The answer is that lockdown caused the economic crisis.

Lockdown caused the revolution.

In fact, lockdown finished the war for us.

Now the question is,

is what are we going to create afterwards?

And the question now is how did lockdown create the crisis and why?

And going into some reasoning tools that an economist or assistant scientist might use.

Let's examine at least the United States.

I can't give statistics about India or the Middle East, for which we have several participants here, and even some from the Far East.

But at least in the West, I can say that about half of the entire workforce is employed by small business.

Laundromats, butcher shops, bakeries, guys that mow the lawn or install the lawn.

Every baker, candlestick maker, car auto mechanic,

Many machine shops, artists, architects, all those people are, for the most part, small business.


SPEAKER_05:
And the truth is that small businesses are owned by individuals.


SPEAKER_12:
Hey Jared, I'm just seeing your video frozen.

So maybe you could just reload the Jitsi and just see if it.

Oh boy.

No, it's all good, it's all good.

Just reload it, your video will come back on.


SPEAKER_09:
Okay, you want me to get back on?


SPEAKER_12:
So just bear with us one moment while Jared reloads his page, comes back into the room

Really interesting stuff.

There's only one timeline that we're in, so it's difficult to disentangle some of these causes and effects.

Welcome back, Jared.

And then as soon as you re-enable, you should be good to continue.

Okay, we see your screen.


SPEAKER_05:
All right, Jared, we see your screen, but I still can't hear.


SPEAKER_12:
Still can't hear you, Jared, but I can see your screen.

So potentially your headphones could be out of battery.

Perfect, perfect.

There we go.

I can hear you again.


SPEAKER_13:
Can you hear me now?

Sounds good.

You can hear me now?

Yes.

Thanks for clearing it up.


SPEAKER_08:
Okay.

I can't hear you, but fortunately I don't need to.

It's a failure.

Can everybody see my screen?

I don't know if I'm still sharing.


SPEAKER_12:
So now we're back.

Yes.

Continue.

Perfect.


SPEAKER_08:
All right.

This is going to be a fun lecture, folks, because I'm roasting in this car.

All right.

Here we go.

I have no idea what the time is.

I think I'm at 12 minutes.

Okay, so small businesses close as they cannot pay rent seekers, right?

So individuals can't deal with, you know, our economies are not set up so that individuals can deal with zero cash flow.

Let's see if that works.

And since these people are essentially required to yield money to their rent holders, so that's the government of the local area, rent, obviously...

small businesses end up having to close to keep operating funds in their pocket.

And so this precipitates a chain of income loss.

The employees don't have income.

They can't pay services.

Services cannot pay rent.

They don't pay rent to rent seekers, and the rent can't pay services.

And so everybody just starts...

getting fired.

There's nothing to do to stop it.

So as it stands, I really can't... Problems in the West are just beginning because half of the employment base is going to be destroyed by the end of lockdown.

Big business is now heavily in debt to all governments.

Small businesses will be disincentivized to restart in the same place.

And I compare this to the Dust Bowl incident.

I have the link here.

Historically, this is an incident that took place in the United States right between the First and Second World Wars.

There was what's called the Great Depression.

And during the Great Depression, many farmers tried to, in order to pay their debt, landlords and the government, they tried to farm more.

So they heavily plowed all the fields in the Midwest.

It was promoted by some bad science at the time.

And

And anyway, this caused these giant dust storms that destroyed the topsoil.

And these humongous dust storms actually destroyed the entire economy.

It prevented anybody from growing anything or working.

Millions and millions of people, some 30% or 40% of people in the Midwest and most of the farming base moved to California, Washington, and Oregon, much further west, including my family.

And they never came back.

Farming never came back.

That actually opened up a hole for factory farming to come in because now the land was cheap once it had recovered.

And also the workforce will be forced to react.

There will be a bunch of people graduating now that are highly in debt and unemployable.

I would also argue that welfare relief is not by itself a solution because implementation is tricky.

And it appears that decrease in living standards appears inevitable throughout the West, including my own.

I mean, I don't know what's going to happen.

As Justin just said, underemployment is a profound driver of death.

So I have a study here that shows suicide increases 40%.

140%.

So full 40% over the average value increase of suicide from underemployment and unemployment.

I think it's within a year.

That study I think was done in Germany.

So things are going to happen.

And something that we can do here is

is think about different ways to revise Western economies.

And I actually don't have that many slides after this, so fortunately we can focus on this little picture here.

Now this picture is drawn by an artist named Brenna Quinlan.

You can find her online.

This is from her, I don't know, some social media site.

And she's sort of a eco-Maoist.

I don't know that I really get with that political alignment, but there are some great things that I do agree with here.

She's got normal, and this is of course not normal necessarily for

But certainly for many Western countries, you've got planes in the sky, factories, people at jobs, and some little fellow here on a bunch of money.

And they're talking about COVID, and the skies are clear, the factories are shut down, including power plants.

And there's people with their kids, a product of which happened to us today, as my daughter would not let me give you guys this lecture.

That's why I'm in the car.

And a way forward, right?

So she's got windmills and a food co-op and a duck in the pond, a guy bicycling.

These are pretty nice things.

Not so sure about this guy in the cage.

But there are some complications that I want to hit you with.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_08:
whole sectors of people in actually different industries.

Building these things that she envisions in order to replace our current infrastructure is going to take a lot of factories.

Factories require power.

Factories require chemicals and resources.

I mean, some people seem to think that windmills grow out of the ground.

That's not true.

Windmills require a very destructive and complex process of manufacture.

They also require heavy machinery, a lot of pollution and complication to set them up.

So what's going to mitigate that?

What's the thought behind that?

She's saying no nuclear power.

Why?

What do we intend to replace it with?

interest in human rights, not just the guy in the cage, but what about all these other people that get displaced by these jobs, right?

These guys in the little desks, what about all their people that help them and, you know, what's going to happen to all them?

You know, jobs, abilities, interest training.

I mean, there's some issues here.

But revisioning the Western economy, and I would argue also in some ways India is a developing economy, maybe even China.

Revisioning some of these economies is a great practice that we can get into now.

It's necessary.

And so today I invite you to model like a complexity scientist.

Generally, this is only one way of doing science.

This is the way that modelers do science, not all scientists.

But we sort of work in these 10-ish steps.

Opinions may vary.

You first try to make a realistic assessment of the situation.

You break things down into chunks.

After that, you eliminate variables.

Okay.

Going as fast as I can here, folks.

I got three minutes on the clock.

You try to make a graphical model of these relationships, collect some data, and you then test this graphical model with a computer, ideally, or perhaps just pen and paper, and then refine your ideas.

So what I wanted to do with the rest of my talk is refine Brenna's ideas a little bit.

So we can't start at the finish line when we revise an economy.

What I want you to do is build a path starting from where we are today to something more like the right side of her vision.

This is overwhelming, so we have to break it down into the few things that she wants.

She's got bicycles.

I already went through this.

Windmills.

Some different desk jobs.

Trees.

Co-op.

I want to pay attention to the items that I think are reasonable, renewable power, the ending of desk jobs, food co-ops, and bicycling.

I'm not going to get into these other sort of weirder ideas.

And now I'm sort of eliminating variables in my little map, right?

So we imagine dismissing exclusively renewable power for now.

Mainly because medicine science requires lots of power.

Base industries require lots of power.

And our Twitters, our Snapchats, Google activism blogs, and so on, those all require power.

So getting rid of renewable power, at least in the context of my little example here, is pretty difficult.

And I'm just going to instead focus on these last two items.

I'm going to dismiss bicycling for now because most developed countries are either urban or non-urban layouts.

It's not something we could do tomorrow.

I'm just going to instead focus on food and eliminating bad and boring jobs.

So here I'm getting down to an ideal topic.

And I would argue that food is...

Lockdown has destroyed food chains for many poor and rural people, especially in Africa and the Near East.

There's some people in downtown, I think that's Chicago, and these are some people in Bangalore waiting for food.

And if we do a little map of modern food infrastructure, we can see that...

It is vertical.

So I don't have two screens right now.

I'm getting pinged by Dan.

Not too sure what to do.


SPEAKER_12:
You're all good.

You're all good.


SPEAKER_08:
All right.

I'm sort of getting blasted here.

I can't really...


SPEAKER_12:
We were seeing the notifications from the facilitator team.

It wasn't us trying to hurry you along or anything.

So take a few more minutes and finish it out and we're good to go.

So thanks for that.


SPEAKER_08:
All right.

Okay, good.

Well, I'm so glad you guys can hear me.

Okay.

So Brenna, let's go ahead and try to just give me five minutes and I'll get it done.

So

On the left here, Brenna has drawn a reasonable picture of what the actual food system is like.

In almost all Western countries, even those that consider themselves environmentally friendly,

very aware, like Germany and some of those countries like France.

Believe it or not, my European friends, your food is vertical, okay?

So it starts with agrochemical science and that goes to logistics, which goes to industrial scaled agriculture.

And then especially in Eastern, or excuse me, especially in European countries, that food gets shipped, it gets packaged,

and then sent to retail.

And what Brenna suggests here is a food system that exists as a network.

And she's got foraging, growing your own gardens, farmer's market, local co-op, supported agriculture.

And there's a whole bunch of different connections so that if one of these goes down, then somebody else will be able to take up the slack, theoretically.

This is assuming, I guess, that you're not eating much meat.

In America, CSA does support me.

So this is sort of a simplified diagram of Brenna's ideas here.

And I'm going to lump the forage and grow your own, et cetera, into this personal labor diagram.

And I'm going to talk about this box companies thing in a minute.

The rest I think I've pointed out already.

So I hope you'll buy that little diagram.

They've got free stuff in the network along with a co-op.

For those of you that are not familiar with a co-op, that is a grocery store that is operated as a nonprofit.

And the way it works is by volunteers.

Okay.

So there are great benefits to Brenna's proposal.

It does have a reduced reliance on aid as a solution, which I love.

It has a reduced carbon footprint, which I really love.

And ideally, if things are not too far.


SPEAKER_13:
Jared, you may have dropped your microphone.


SPEAKER_12:
Oh, no.

Just for a few seconds.

It's okay, Jared.

If you're good though, I think maybe this is a fine stop.


SPEAKER_08:
I don't know if people can hear me anymore.

We can hear you.

Dan, can you just send me a... It's community supported agriculture.

Dan, can you send me a text message in the chat thing so that I can see if you guys can still hear me?

Because for some reason I'm having a disconnection between...

my device and my headphones.

Okay, great.

All right.

Let's just go with this.

Let's go with this.

I, I'm sorry.

It's a technology thing.

So there are some flaws in her proposal, though, right?

Suitability for dense populations may vary.

Vulnerable to local disaster, not perfectly sustainable, right?

It requires some of these modern tools.

And there's a significant time component from the personal labor.

And I leave it as an exercise to you, the audience, what other pieces are missing here.

So my challenge to you is how can Complexity Recon bring pieces of the proposal to use?

And now you can see I'm sort of winnowing down variables so that we can sort of do a model of it.

And again, we're going through our little complexity sciences checklist.

So what is impractical to implement today?

What requires secondary ecosystems?

And this community supported agriculture is not something that we can set up tomorrow, right?

That's a small production farm.

And these box companies are sort of things that exist only in very developed areas.

And these are sort of like app-supported companies that rely on a sophisticated logistical chain in the internet.

So I don't want to get into that too much.

So we'll get rid of those.

And I want to add that box companies present an unrealized resource for developing new systems of commerce.

So here's something we know that has lasting impact and that we can implement and we could finance with small donations.

And I mean complexity weekend, right?

And so what I'd like to see from this conference for this proposal, if this interests you, is reports about how to set up a co-op, maybe a study of collectivized barter pricing.

For example, one squash is worth three apples.

How do we do barter instead of...

How do you regulate these prices?

We can work on reports that look into ways of organizing personal labor.

Work share for foraging, maybe specializing like I grow tomatoes and you grow apples and we trade.

Ways to break that up amongst groups of organized people.

And then ways of distributing and understanding farming and aquaculture, hydroponics.

These are great technologies.

They should be used everywhere.

How can we get these out to people?

Great opportunities for art and media and websites, right?

People who are interested in the creative aspects of this, the social aspects.

I think that this is a good example of something that we could do.

And I only ask that you contribute to solutions rather than critique, right?

So the ideas coming out of here, I just humbly suggest that we focus on things that we could start working on today and not fantasies of taking over the world.

things that we can deliver to people today.

We can write a report today and we can get it to those people in Bangalore.

We could get them donations and get them set up, getting food out instead of dreaming about, you know, some impossible future.

That is my message to you.

And I'm sorry for running late.

I won't have time to cover this.

I think it's a little on the side.

Um,

So what I wanted to present to you was agent-based models.

They have a benefit of having this simple programming approach.

You basically set up a set of simple rules, and it enables emergent behavior without having to do a bunch of fancy math.

So you can simulate complex systems very easily.

I was going to do a demonstration for you, but because of the mess of this technology issue here,

It's not going to happen.

I think it's wrong.

But if you're interested in studying agent-based models, please let the other facilitators and myself know, and I'm happy to give a workshop or a talk about it.

Tomorrow would be fine.

And we can talk more about how to get you guys started doing simple agent-based models and just enabling you guys to do some of this complexity science-based modeling.

Anyway, those are my recommendations.

You don't have to do what I tell you.

I just want you to think about things in this way.

List variables, cut them down, find what you can change.

I inspire you to action.

Thank you so much for joining us.

And I'll end my talk there.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_12:
Jared, thank you.

And also happy birthday.

Happy birthday to Jared who traveled into his driveway, commuted into the car, not with a car, but into his car so that he could speak with us.

We really appreciate that.

So now we've finished with the official content sections of our Complexity Weekend.

Now we're going to move into the team formation, the formal phase where teams will be really getting together and starting to align around these questions.

So I'd like to welcome JP and Sean back in, and they can enable their videos.

For those of you who are watching the live stream, it's a little bit of a choose your own adventure.

So the first thing right off the bat, this is an absolutely optional live stream.

So if you have a team and you want to jump into a Jitsi or you just want to take a break, whatever it is, totally feel free.

This is an optional live stream where we're going to be brainstorming and talking about complexity, but we're also just going to be making sure that it's a totally optional space so that teams can get to work.

JP, anything to add on that before we start talking a little more?


SPEAKER_07:
No, I think that covers just about everything.

Feel free to contact any facilitators or actually a score team for that matter if you need any assistance whatsoever.

This is the point where it turns over to the participants and this becomes your conference.

So good luck everyone and we'll be here.


SPEAKER_12:
So we'll be here and just to feature some more of our facilitators who maybe only gave a talk and so they didn't get that small group feedback or maybe you didn't get to go to their workshop.

We'd like to welcome on Sudebi and Praval of the Epicenter.

And when they join, we're just going to have a conversation that

We're going to talk about complexity.

Greetings, the epicenter.

We're going to talk about complexity.

We're all going to be actively monitoring the text channels and the facilitators who you're not seeing on screen are really actively going to be helping groups form

Any question that anyone has, just bring it to general, bring it to requests, bring it to tech support, whatever it is, just type in the chat and our facilitators are watching to help you.

And they're behind the scenes and just what's happening on this optional live stream.

The Epicenter, really take it away.

I would just love to learn more about innovation and hackathons in a global context and your impressions and what we can do for this session.

Oh, still muted.


SPEAKER_10:
Hi, you can hear me, right?

Sounds good.

Thank you.

Sorry, you know, because of the time difference, we had fallen asleep earlier and we were just catching up on the key base.

So please let us know if we have missed out on something.

So we have not yet figured out the final teams, right?

As of now, not really.


SPEAKER_12:
No, so some teams are beginning to form.

So in the explore channels, explore bias, explore complexity, explore economics, people are aligning around questions and then filling out the form.

And people watching this live stream probably don't have a team that they're aligned with yet.

And so for the people who are watching this live stream, there's the channel.

I need a team.

And then there's us talking about what we're talking about.

And that's what we're there for.


SPEAKER_10:
All right, thank you.

So I think one of the things that we have seen which sometimes creates a bit of a conflict within teams is that most people, if you give them a theme that they resonate with,

And then they connect to it.

What happens is that say, I like education, you like education and Prabal likes education and we flock together and create a team.

We all are very strongly opinionated about education and what we know and what we like about it.

Right.

And within that team, what happens is, especially when you don't have too much time and you have to go through the process pretty fast is that some people already come with an idea.

Some people don't have any particular idea or any particular problem that they want to solve, but they're generally passionate about broader ideas about education.

And some people already have a solution idea, not just about the problem.

They think they know what the solution is, right?

So I think the starting point is to bring them to like a similar kind of a platform and figure out what is the starting point, because unless and until that is clarified,

Um, you know, there, there is going to be a lot of wastage of time.

So I feel that's one thing we need to, um, adjust that.

What is the starting point?

Is it a team where most people are at a level where they're because see, if most people in the team are at a level of, okay, I'm, I'm passionate about it.

Um, but let's explore then the entire time can go in exploring a problem statement.

Um, if I come with an already existing idea of a problem.

then some voices dominate and some voices don't.

And if I already have a solution idea, then there is no explanation.

Because you already think that you know, and you're just trying to justify what you're trying to claim.

So I feel as facilitators, we need to know that about the teams.


SPEAKER_12:
Very nice.

So maybe another way to get at this question is in this marketplace of some people who have skills, some people who have needs that they need filled, and no one really knows which pieces are going to make the best puzzle.

Because if you knew exactly what skills and what insights, what perspectives you'd need, it'd be a done job.

So how do we navigate the space where some are offering, some people are requesting, but no one really knows the right matches?


SPEAKER_10:
So one of the things that, that might be helpful is that, uh, so there are multiple ways to go about it, but within, um, the passion that we are showing, say about a particular, like a broader area, like education or employment or something like that.

If anybody who's signing up over there, we give them a few lenses to choose or a few hats to wear.

So for example, someone might be a content specialist.

who might have more research-based data.

Someone might be more like a designer of products, whereas someone might be a designer of service or systems.

Whereas there might be somebody who probably has more

Technological kind of aptitude or, you know, they might be able to not just theoretically talk about technology, but they might be able to help you with what can be made into a feasible kind of a solution.

So as long as all of these things are there, that's, that's really good.

One thing that's really important is that you obviously need people who have some kind of research.

Because if it's a group of people who have no idea about the content, it's like an ocean and it won't work out.

But at the same time, if it's a team full of techies, then the entire conversation goes around what is feasible as opposed to what is desirable.

So which means that you need somebody who can be a moderator within the team.

who has more kind of a practical idea about either a business kind of viability or someone who understands it from a human-centered point of view, whether it really can happen, who can ask these critical questions both to the researcher and to the techie.

And I think that will make a balanced team.

So I feel I don't know how to go about it.

But just thinking aloud, if we just create another column where once people show their interest, if we give them four or five hats,

and say, which hat do you actually wear?

So we will know if the team has a balance.

And even as facilitators, then we will know which kind of input we can give.


SPEAKER_13:
Awesome.

Thank you.

JP, you have a question?


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah.

We've been working with a concept called metacognition, both on this back end and generally.

Do you have any thoughts on that, or not just metacognition,

the team itself becomes the entity and it learns and it changes.

Do you have any thoughts or ideas on that aspect?


SPEAKER_10:
I mean, we have worked around metacognition in some theoretical ways.

I don't have an answer whether we can currently use it.

I mean, we need to think about it.

I don't have a ready-made answer to it.

We need to think about it.

But yes, I mean, I think that that's a really good question.

And I mean, one of the things that I don't have an answer again, but I think as a group of facilitators and all of us were passionate, one of the questions I think we need to have clarity about is where do we want this to end tomorrow night?

And is there a shorter term and a longer term view of that?

Because I think if we have clarity about it,

then we can articulate that.

And I think that seems to be a good idea because I'm trying to wear the hat of a participant who's coming here and who might be currently absolutely wide-eyed because so many different kinds of inputs have come from so many facilitators.

And I'm feeling like, oh, now I want to use this and use that.

And then suddenly realize that time is such a big constraint that I

I don't know what to do.

Right?

So if, if you tell them that, and I think anything is fine, but I think having that clarity is important.

If I know that even beyond tomorrow, there is a way in which I can continue.

Then the next question would be that, okay, I might be passionate.

I might want to continue, but.

as a group are we going to get some kind of support from say the complexity um we can facilitate a team if they want to take it forward because uh you know otherwise the long term always sounds good i mean theoretically but one needs to understand how that will be fueled right so then your your question of using more kind of metacognitive kind of stuff can be interspersed in how we uh deal with it

But if we all decide that everything is done by tomorrow night, then I think we should have a very practical kind of thing as to where do we want it to end.

Like to give an example, are we also trying to say that maybe if we have to be practical and as a team, we don't know whether we can go forward officially.

I mean, we may or may not.

Then one option might be that we take them through a process

And then by the end of tomorrow, they all reach at least some kind of an ideation stage and we create an idea catalog.

You know, and in that idea catalogue, all these different ideas can be sort of explained.

And since we are using different theories and aspects of complexity, it should not just be given in the form of a summary, because currently due to COVID-19, there is no dearth of ideas.

What we need to understand is, are these actionable concepts or not, right?

So I think if you give them a then format that these are the things like, can you talk about the business viability?

Can you talk about the technological feasibility?

Can you think about the human centered desirability?

And very importantly, what kind of research has gone into

you claiming that this even is contextual at least if that's put out there in that form maybe someone else can build upon that idea because you know it is always possible that maybe i have an idea but i don't have the bandwidth to take the idea forward but maybe you have the bandwidth to take it forward but you can't have an idea so then we can all collectively with all our networks can make this idea catalog uh you know uh just just be out there and any i mean

basically encourage other people to build upon it.

And of course, give credit to the team who was given the idea.

And if some members of the team want to be a part of that longer-term execution, that's great.

But people might choose not to continue as well.

But at least then the idea is not lost.


SPEAKER_07:
I think that's a healthy place to be.

For me, it's like there are two ways of creating teams, right?

One, you just kind of bring people together.

So you have your simple rules, if you will, from my beginning slide where you just have your simple rules and then you see where the behavior takes you.

And the other one is this goal-oriented behavior where things orient and things structure to get there.

So I think this is a really neat way of team formations on both ends.

So Sean, do you have something to say?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, sorry, I was adding the Google form.

You actually answered my first question, which is going to be, how do you avoid innovation theater?

What questions specifically can we ask the teams?

And you just listed them all as soon as I was thinking about it.

So you already nailed it.

Don't worry about it.

But another question is, yeah, right, is,

how do we as a conference help support them tangibly?

Like what are things we could tangibly do to help support the ongoing nature of some of these projects or the passing the baton, like you're saying, if they end up not having enough bandwidth to continue it, what can we tangibly do as an organization to check in with them at certain times after the conference or what do you think there?


SPEAKER_10:
Do you have any answer to that?


SPEAKER_00:
I think, Sean, in our experience, what we have seen is although a lot of people intend to carry on with ideas after one of these hackathons or one of these innovation sprints, feasibility in terms of time and the amount of time they can dedicate to the project becomes an issue at times, especially when what we call the WIFM is not very clear for them.

everybody has at the back of their mind a cost benefit analysis sheet.

And when they think that the amount of time that I need to give this and the duration that I need to keep investing in this, whether something tangible evolves out of it or not is what they try and look at in terms of the investment of time, et cetera.

Yeah, too early in the game for this complexity weekend for us to say, but maybe we need to have some mechanism, whether it be toll gates, whether it be a process that we define for the participants going forward, which they can be a part of.

And we can try and take these ideas to the logical conclusion as far as possible.

Every person will have a different definition of what a tangible benefit for them from this process is.

But if we can kind of get around the fact that it is COVID-19 season, and it's going to last for a while, and we all try and do whatever we can in our capacities, given the knowledge and experience that we have, then a process can be built around how we take these ideas forward.

And of course, Keybase, Sean, for Sudebi and me, it's been a new experience.

Keeping up with it, especially when you're not on it real time, does become a .. For me to catch up, I've been spending a lot of time going through each of the messages, et cetera, each of the things that you have there.

So one is, of course, key-based.

The other is making it less real time, maybe taking it out on Google Drive or creating something else where

And we establish a process where we have these people who are kind of dedicated to these teams and the teams themselves know what's motivating them to take it forward.

So there has to be a process in place if you need it.


SPEAKER_10:
And if I may add to that, I think, so these are some of the questions that we have posed in some other processes that we have been a part of.

And one of those processes now is thinking that they're going to have a second round of a hackathon.

where they're going to do the hackathon, I mean, at three different levels.

So some people who have generated some kind of ideas and are interested in taking it forward can come back to the hackathon.

I mean, after a few weeks time or a couple of months time, they can come now with a more refined idea.

So they don't spend time during the hackathon in ideation, but then from idea to actualization, you know, some teams are coming back.

who have gone beyond the idea into some kind of prototyping.

So they're again coming back with the prototyping and we as mentors are helping them to figure out how now you can make it at a business level viable because I mean, with all your ideas, it might just not take place because you know, and yet there is room for another kind of level of people who are coming back to the hackathon again is where you're coming like to understand how an innovation process kind of works with.

And I think this sort of happened because primarily both of us and some other people, we kept pushing.

When we first did the hackathon and we were a part of the hackathon, we felt a lot of people at the end of it felt very betrayed.

It's a strong word, but the betrayal was at the level of, oh, I invested my energy for two days, two nights, and we came together and it was lovely.

But then what happened?

You're not with that.

So, uh, I mean, for some people, it was a reality check as well, because they were very invited about their ideas and then realize that after getting all the feedback, that, uh, ideas are great, but it's not really actionable.

So somewhere, uh, we kept pushing for it to have another kind of a closure, which is why we got back.

So that's why I'm saying that knowing from all these other experiences, if we can do something about it here, because there is so much energy right now.

and also because we are not saying that it's a complexity we can hackathon about anything we are talking about an ongoing challenge the whole world is facing so i would say i mean from our end as we told you earlier as well we really like interacting with all of you we are more than happy to come back again and do something with all of you together so but it's up to everybody else as well


SPEAKER_04:
Totally.

Dan, real quick, I have one question because I'm going to pop up and start playing around the other stuff because I think it's getting some attention.

But I just wanted to kind of address the last point you made, which was, you know, getting all like my project's going to change the world, right?

And then being totally ungrounded and not tied to who you're actually solving the problem for.

What are some of the tangible ways that teams can really connect to stakeholders and really ground their project in the reality of the situation so that they're not intellectualizing it, they're actually solving a problem that exists, you know?


SPEAKER_10:
So, I mean, like I said, like we were seeing that if first of all, this is something that I feel as a facilitator, you know, like when we go to a class or in a, in a space to facilitate, people have questions and sometimes we want people to feel the sense of uncertainty, not because we don't know, but it's by design.

We don't want them to be very exact.

Right.

But I think there's a difference.

I think anybody who comes as a participant or as a student in a space,

very quickly they can figure out

whether the uncertainty is by design or you as a facilitator is vague.

It's because you don't know where you are going, right?

So I think we as a team should not be in that space where we are vague.

So if we have clarity, I feel somewhere we can address it before they start feeling it and asking or not asking about it, right?

That, okay, this is where we want to go with it.

And I'm not saying that today only we have to say because if we need more time as a team to kind of get back to them, it's fine.

But definitely before tomorrow, if we tell them that there is room for people to say that not only that they're interested, but they might be able to give, say, a couple of hours a week

or, you know, a few hours in a week or something for a finite period of time.

Beyond which we can touch base with you and how we do that.

I think we can figure it out, which medium, I mean, we can do a Jitsi video call or something of that sort.

I mean, we both always feel that, um, having a key base kind of a channel is good, but people feel it more when you are, you know, are either in audio or on video, right?

Because you feel like something is happening.

So if we choose to come back, say, maybe in a month's time, and we come back because there is some processes that we set now itself that, OK, first of all, by tomorrow when we finish, we can give a deadline by Tuesday or Wednesday.

Please fill out a form and send us back.

That goes as a catalog, as we are seeing.

Then we can touch base and figure out who.

It doesn't matter.

I mean, if it's a team of five members, not all five members need to commit to take it forward.

But is there one member in the team who's willing to take it forward?

Then we can create cross teams.

Some ideas probably can come together.

So I think some processes can be set up.

It's not a very difficult thing to do if we have the intention.

And then we set some timelines for ourselves and for them.

And very importantly, before we end tomorrow, if we share that idea with them, I think that's really important.

They don't feel like I said in the other spaces where I've seen people feeling either vague or betrayed or they think that they have done some great job.

I mean, that's also happened that they think they have saved the world.

So that's also there.


SPEAKER_12:
Awesome answer.

I wanted to address a few of the points about where we see tomorrow ending up and also where we see the long range vision for the weekend, the teams that start here.

So the first thing and the fundamental point is long term teams are formed here and in this long term community.

It's our goal.

So nothing is higher than making the community long term, everything stable in that way and also dynamic and flexible.

I'm going to talk about just a few of the key aspects that we hope will make these long-term collaborations successful for you and your teams.

So the first aspect is the tech aspect.

So we really appreciate everybody getting over the activation energy barrier to make the Keybase username, to learn how to join the channels, to learn how to mute yourself on Jitsi.

All these things where it's a little bit stepping out of your confidence zone, maybe it's a lot stepping out of your zone.

But everybody who did it, who made it through the portal, it's like you've learned a skill and you can catalyze low zero cost teams from your network.

You can help them set up a key base account.

So the first part is at this conference, you're already synced up on technology with your teammates.

So it's not going to be like, wow, that was magical.

What's your email address?

Or what do you use Slack?

It's going to be like, you're here on the platform.

So that's what's tech.

the second part is the community aspect you're really connected to a community that's like a fountain you'll always be able to dip back into the community and also continue to contribute and these channels like explore um explore our explore cognition

they're actually specifically not project channels because exploring art is something that's open 24 7 because curiosity is open 24 7. so people will always be adding new resources and posting updates here and so that will actually help you uh get to the point of not just being inspired after the conference but actually cross-mix the teams after the conference

usually is not what happens.

Usually they're mixing to some limited extent and then people retreat.

And here it's like we've converged in a very safe and specific way.

And now we're going to stay together.

We're going to be cryptographically linked, cryptographically bonded, and that will actually allow this mixing to happen

days, years from now.

And then the last point of the three with the tech in the community is really the mentorship and the facilitation.

We really hope that the facilitators are also long term players in the community.

Everyone is just a participant in this community.

capacity and the facilitators who helped us, who volunteered their time for a free and no payment to really anyone at all in the conference event.

They're skilled, they're caring.

They all want to see individuals and teams.

Thank you, JP.

They really all want to see individuals succeed, which means getting on a team where they're a valued part.

And then they want to see the team succeed, which means getting the team to incorporate complexity science by doing all these things that you're bringing up.

And so the end point for tomorrow, while I haven't really addressed what it might be, it's definitely more like a checkpoint than it is like a finish line for us here at Complexity Weekend.


SPEAKER_16:
Yeah.

Yeah.

Absolutely.

You want to say something?


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, I want to throw in a little bit of a signal boost and a here, here.

This is the part where we were talking about Complexity Weekend as a complex system, and it's made up of everybody who is out there right now, right?

And Sidney, you mentioned one thing.

Some people might have a feeling of frustration.

And that's normal, and that's a part of the process, because other people are feeling that too.

And that's why talking with each other, figuring out how much sense did this thing make, how much sense did this thing make, what did you get out of this, what did you get out of all the different components of our program so far.

That's where the magic and the thinking happens because I can guarantee if somebody's scratching their head right now going like, what does everything have to link up with everything else?

What are the cross lines?

Somebody else is thinking the same thing.

And that's where ideas are formed.

This is the part of the conference where we turn into a complex system.

This is the part of the conference where things are nonlinear and we make far reaching connections.

So I feel that's an important aspect of what's playing out right now to convey.

So this is all a part of it.

This intentional like, where am I right now?

Maybe you're tuned into the live stream and haven't formed a team.

This is a part of it.

This is where we are.


SPEAKER_12:
Thanks for the... One note on that, just before giving it back to the Epicenter, is the live stream, the media is the message.

We're really engaged in a video chat where you had to reload because you're 10,000 miles away and the internet isn't magic.

At the same time,

This is going to be watched by people afterwards.

There's people who just stepped away from a live stream to work with their teams, and they're going to pick back up in 20 minutes.

There's going to be people for whom it's nighttime right now, such as yourself, maybe they're sleeping.

They're going to come back and they're also going to understand that the live experience is because we're creating it live and improvised out of necessity.

This simply cannot be prepared or scripted, especially the errors.

But it's something that always reflects what was arising from our community while it was happening.

And so it's just really special to be able to have a format accessible and also free.

We're just live streaming from Jitsi and then people volunteer their time, the participants, the facilitators, and that's what makes it happen.


SPEAKER_10:
Yeah, absolutely.

We missed a bit of what JP was talking about because we

So could you just tell us what he was actually mentioning because we missed that?


SPEAKER_07:
I apologize.

I think it was the signal boost for, you know, you mentioned that maybe some people are feeling frustrated out there.

And I was kind of like signal boosting that.

I say, that's a part of it.

I'm glad they're feeling frustrated because

For me, the entire process of looking at the complexity space is drinking from the fire hose.

You have so many people with such great knowledge here that they have a lifetime of experience working in the fields they do.

And that's the magic of a lot of complex systems research is nobody's an expert in complexity, but people are experts in their own fields.

And it's by sampling complexity

this expert, this expert, this expert, this expert, and synthesizing it all together that you finally come to something interesting.

So as people are frustrated out there, as they're wondering, you know, we're a pretty fast-paced conference by all measures.

As they're wondering what's going on, I really want them to be with that idea and be with their feelings on that and talk to other people who are also feeling that.

I think, you know, that's where the magic happens for me.


SPEAKER_16:
So, yeah.


SPEAKER_12:
Awesome.

DFB Center, is there anything else you'd like to speak to?

Otherwise, I think you might be able to step into a few teams as they're forming and provide that kind of detailed mentoring work.

Just one last question I had was, how do we assess team health

on the fly?

How do we assess the health and the function of the team?

And then how do we assess the likelihood or the productivity of a team when we don't want to aim too high, we don't want to aim too low, we're not going to get it done this weekend.

So how do we know how healthy and productive our teams are?

What kind of checkups can we do along the way?


SPEAKER_10:
Sorry, Dan, you're breaking off a bit.

Just what are the...


SPEAKER_12:
What are the health assessments for the team?

The productivity and the efficiency along the way.


SPEAKER_10:
So are you trying to talk about the assessment, say, by till tomorrow or in a longer term way?


SPEAKER_12:
I think there are things that you could scaffold us on over the weekend and stabilize us on over the weekend and kind of feed us.

But then once the training wheels come off and these teams are just in the wild and how can they do those assessments then?

It's like physical therapy.

You learn tricks.


SPEAKER_10:
I think that one way to do it, there is no right answer again for it.

One way to do this somewhat differently is that

Maybe, I mean, we can start a conversation, I mean, just for the next hour or so or whatever, where we as facilitators can just mention one or two criteria, which according to us, criteria or parameters that we would like to see, right?

And I think with this collective kind of things, there will be some shared things that kind of come in.

And I think we can do the same thing with the teams themselves.

So when they get into a team, we can actually ask them, can you create a self-assessment kind of a parameter?

And sometimes, you know, I mean, we have seen that self-assessments are really great because I mean, we sometimes feel that when you're self-assessing, you are going to mark yourself very high or low, but if it's done the right way, it can be a fantastic tool to be used.

So as they're getting into their respective teams,

if one of the first exercises you give them is that how would you want to be evaluated?

Because sometimes what happens is when we talk about evaluation criteria, they might be looking at more of the tangible kind of things, right?

But there are many intangible things that also happen in that process.

So to give an example, some team might just say that, well, for us,

we want to know that okay i was an expert in um say you know uh economics and my interest is in understanding how to address uh unemployment in the current situation and my way to look at my uh you know whether i've been successful or not is is there a shift in my perspective is there something new that i have learned and then can i use that

That's a very intangible thing, but not to be dismissed.

Because as we have to understand that not every idea can be really taken forward in the way in which it's designed initially.

And if that becomes the only filtering point or the only criteria, then a lot of things will not make the mark.

So I feel like if we say that three or four criteria which

cover both the tangible, measurable, immediate kind of things, but which also look at the longer term, more systemic or more intangible kind of factors, you know, which can be something like wellbeing or some kind of psychological or social emotional shift.

It can be that I'm now framing problems better.

And so in a way we will know that you might not be able to contribute that meaningfully to this particular problem.

but we have been able to bring a shift in a much larger way because these are the same people who are going back to their respective places and then hopefully they will be using some of these ideas, right?

So I think it'll be a nice thing to do that if we collectively come up with say three criteria or four as facilitators and we ask them to come up with some of those and then do some kind of assessment.

And that can also happen at a shorter term and a longer term kind of way.

That's quite nice.

We collectively come up with, say, three criteria or four as facilitators, and we ask them to come up with some.


SPEAKER_12:
Awesome.

That was the echo of your own voice from Monica's computer for a second.

so debbie and provol thank you so much um the time zone the unique perspective the experience it's it's really super awesome we're really honored that you participated and yes we hope to continue this discussion uh tomorrow on a live stream perhaps and i know that you're going to be down there with the teams also making these things real

for them because it's not about us coming to some sort of understanding on a live stream it's about these teams making it happen where it actually matters so thanks again you can just close the jitsi window yeah thank you so much for calling us as well thanks jp thanks bye-bye hey monica good to have you on sorry about that i thought for some reason it said mute so i was like wait what


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, so you can hear me now?


SPEAKER_07:
I've got some questions for you.

Yes, please.

What's your perspective right now?

What are you feeling?

What are you seeing?

What's inspiring?


SPEAKER_02:
Great question.

I'm excited as we have been speaking and discussing earlier.

It's interesting about how you can be present without being present.

And I think it's really putting that perspective, whether it's on the chats or those who's hanging out online in the beach right now, or those who's trying to connect maybe at a Jitsi and in a different conversation, whereas me just, you know, playing at lives, which I didn't realize the voice was being echoed.

And so I think it's really exciting to see how the online platform is permitting what being present and involved means.

But I do want to be mindful because I've been hearing a lot of amazing conversations on, I want to find a team, like I need questions on that.

And so I

I've been kind of finding ways of like have some thoughts on it.

So we'd love to share.

Maybe this could help.


SPEAKER_05:
Sure.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

So with that, then I made another jam board, which I am now loving.

And I believe that Dan will be able to share the link with others as well.

Am I right?


SPEAKER_12:
Yep.

I'm going to post that link into I Need a Team.

So people who are looking for a team, we're not going to spam general anymore.

We're going to go to only I Need a Team.

And this is going to be really focused on individuals who are still unaffiliated and want to form a team.

So I'm going to post it in I Need a Team right now.


SPEAKER_02:
Perfect.

you're not tuning into this you might not find the link so that's why it's going to be really important um so the reason why i wanted to create this is i understand there's still folks who's looking to connect and i agree you know i love chatting but sometimes i could get overwhelmed right now while i was just preparing this i now have missed 200 chats and you're probably feeling the same way and so let's let's do a different approach for those if you have already connected that's great continue your conversation in fact

If we take a look at page two, I did put the question of if you already have a team, that's great.

We do want you to fill out the form and we want to officially see that name.

But in the time being, because there might be still people out there who might want to join your team, but didn't know your team existed yet.

Maybe if you can put a note, maybe put your team name and then the theme.

You don't have to explain everything.

So maybe, for instance, my team name, maybe it's Steve.

And yeah.

maybe the SEED team is working on solving the transportation challenge.

That's all I'm going to put here because that would hopefully signal people who want to figure out, ooh, which team, ooh, that's the team I want to join.

Can I join that team?

Do you guys still need teams?

Like this is my expertise.

And then you can join the conversation.

And hopefully one person at least put their key base name so that way somebody could follow up with you.

And so this is where you can share if you were still interested

If you already have a team.

Now that being said, there's still people which I think most of us are still looking for teams and that's where starting from page three, I've kind of mapped it out just in case for those later on who's not at the same time zone, they're going to want to check back at this later and just be able to relate.

So I kind of manually wrote some thoughts out so that it's easy to navigate just even with the link.

But basically here I kind of pointed out if you're still looking, continue to now swipe to the next pages because I basically started putting different post-it notes on themes that I was noticing from your wonderful conversations, which is great.

Keep them coming.

And hopefully what we can try to do is help you find one another better.

So this is how the idea is that I've already kind of started putting out some of these keywords based on the things that you have been sharing online.

So I heard security, art, transportation, food security, supply chain, resilience, economies, education, privacy, unemployment, hospitality, health.

Uh, and then I just copied the same thing.

And so here, for instance, you'll be like, you know what?

I actually have a different topic.

You know, Dan, what's a different topic that we haven't, that I haven't put it that you've seen in the chat that I should add.


SPEAKER_12:
You know, I just wanted to add in one team just to show how it worked.

Somebody just asked, do you want to make a key-based team about looking in the bodies of insects to see what they're exposed to?

It's like, yes, and all are welcome to join, whether they have experience with epidemiology or with insects or not.

So that's all we have to do to join a team.

Just link up with somebody, make a team name, and you're kind of off and running.

Was there something specifically I could address there, Monica?


SPEAKER_02:
yes to that so for instance is there any other themes or keywords because basically based on these keywords if i'm interested in education what i would envision doing myself is that oh i'm interested so what i'm going to do is i'm going to put my key base here

and then put it next to education because I want to find other people who's doing education and hopefully by you adding those key base notes you can find one another faster and message directly and say oh dad I see that you put a note also there like I couldn't find your mat chat in the 1200 chats because I got a little overwhelmed could we perhaps start a conversation and see maybe we actually care about the same thing


SPEAKER_12:
Yes.

What I did is I put place your username near what you're interested in.

Slides four and five are going to be where people can place their username if they want to learn about anything.

Then on slide two, that's where there's going to be teams that are just open for all to join.


SPEAKER_02:
Absolutely.

JP, is there anything else that you've noticed that you want to add?


SPEAKER_07:
I'm, my honest answer is no.

I think we're, I think, I mean, I'm a fan of the things I don't know.

So my unknown unknowns.

I think it's good.

The only real thing I can say is, you know, again, don't be afraid to reach out if you're feeling stuck or if you're feeling unsure, let's say.


SPEAKER_02:
yeah so because i've done a lot of other hackathons and you know weekend kind of programs i know these are popular questions i don't know if they were already raised but maybe i can raise that i don't know if folks have already raised it but i know one question first thing that always happens like oh okay so that's great folks but what if i love art

and supply chain and security.

Can I put my name in all three of them?

What are some of your thoughts, Dan, and what you hope to see?

I assume most people would have to join at the end of the day in one team, or are they joining three or four teams, considering that we have a short amount of time?


SPEAKER_12:
You know, it's always a question.

JP, do you want to give a first pass?

And then I'll clean up anything you don't mention.


SPEAKER_07:
I'll be happy to take that one.

That's something I'm actually an interesting space.

There are two strategies, two plus strategies to this team formation and brainstorming and especially working in the complex space with creative questioning like that.

And one of them includes the possibility of failure, if I can be perfectly honest.

So that is a way of hedging projects or teams that...

One of them is something you are interested in, but don't have a solid idea that's your risk.

And the other is something you're interested in, you actually have a roadmap for it.

So if you have one stable, one solid core, and then want to branch out to another thing that's a little bit riskier and a little bit more exploratory, that's a viable strategy in all of this.

I'm a fan of saying there are no rules as long as what works for you is going on.


SPEAKER_12:
Yes, agreed with what JP said.

And JP, it was your guidance at the Santa Fe Institute that helped me understand a lot of these team formation dynamics.

And here there's a fun element, which is actually that a lot of our participants are sleeping right now.

So everybody who's stressed about not finding a team

at least you're awake okay so take a breath and it's all gonna be fine we want to really be inclusive of all the time zones and all the logistical constraints whether they were planned or unplanned and so yes it probably will be uh accessible to be on multiple teams but you just have to think about balancing that in the context of your life and taking on multiple new research projects um but

Also, it's not a total commitment to join a team.

I remember that the team that I formed in Santa Fe in 2015 and also the team that I formed in Complexity Weekend last year in San Francisco, in both cases, the group that sort of walked out the door, walked through the checkpoint, was between five to seven people.

And in all cases, the actual productive work happened on a scale of about three months to three years with two to four person groups.

So join groups and don't overjoin.

These aren't just Twitter followers or something, but really think seriously and deeply about what you would want to be involved in in the long term.

And so if there's an exciting project,

and you think, you know, I have this deadline and in a month, I'm really gonna be able to focus on this.

Or if I just did X, Y, Z in this other area, then stay involved.

And also just to bring it back to staying involved with the community is you'll be able to stay in touch with all of these people because we're all in the same Keybase team.

And so as people regain availability or as they gain new perspectives, it will always be possible to rejoin new initiatives.

And so we hope to have this sort of mesh of people and teams and friendships and relationships where a team can just form as needed when the question arises.

JP?


SPEAKER_07:
I like to base complexity management generally.

I like to base what we're working with in the principles of complexity.

And one of the things is kind of a boundary condition.

So as I think about team formation and team sizes, a realistic aim for a team is somewhere between an effective lean team is somewhere between three and five people.

It could be as small as one or two.

upwards of eight.

And I think if we can aim for like the boundary at seven, a hard cutoff would be an interesting, interesting place to lead to some things.

Um, because maybe a team, uh, everybody gloms onto something right away.

Um, that might actually naturally kind of fracture into two different chunks, which is fine.

Um, and actually healthy and expected.

So, um, take this entire process as kind of our, this is our, um,

the boundary between storming and forming.

And let things, as you're discussing things, naturally fall into the places they want to fall into.

So if you have a large two or three different ideas, it's okay to chunk that into smaller compartments as well.

So there's no right way to do it.


SPEAKER_02:
I love that you've all shared that because, you know, it's that's one of the thing that comes a little bit different.

And, you know, thank you all for those who were here earlier.

We spoke about what are the benefits and, you know, just honestly some challenges when we are working virtually.

And one of the thing is that half of our other colleagues are asleep.

So we got to keep that in mind.

So you might want to think about as you're forming teams, noting that, you know, hey, at the end of the day, we want to be able to have about two to seven people working.

We might wanna make sure we don't fill up the entire seven people because there are gonna be people who's gonna wake up and say, oh, I wanna join your team.

Do you still have space?

And you might end up having 20 people.

So try to maybe see based on, I see we have about 19, 20 people who are active.

I hope some of you are able to start forming teams and feel like wherever you're, if this is afternoon, whatever amount of hours that you spend together still for the next few hours that you feel like you're starting a conversation with a group of individual folks.

Maybe you're finding patterns.

Maybe you started with like, I'm going to put my name in two or three different pockets because I'm interested.

But I do hope that if you're seeing parts that you're seeing, you see a post-it that is like, you know what?

I'm seeing more post-its in security.

You know, I want to dig a little bit deeper.

Let's start a thread.

And if you know for sure that you're not going to join another group yet.

Maybe delete your name so that way you're committed to that team and kind of grow into that as the team forms and invite others.

And so the other thing that I did want to add is, yes, continuing on page four and five, I wrote some of the themes that I was noticing, but that doesn't mean that's the only theme.

I want you all to put your theme.

Yes, Maria, thank you for putting mental health as one of the options.

And so put your post-its online.

both for the key base of the themes that you want to join but also the themes that you think is not said here that needs to exist and that way you're going to create a new group based on that dan jp anything else that is coming from the chat that we should highlight


SPEAKER_12:
I like that I'm seeing some of the participants helping each other out, connecting specific usernames to projects, saying, hey, this sounds kind of like something you were mentioning, or I copied this from a different sub-channel.

This sounds like something that you might be interested in.

And also, that's the tip of the iceberg, because people can be reaching out privately and saying things that we just don't see.

And so I just like to see, you know, for every one question, there's 10 in the audience.

And so if for every one person who we can see helping, there's 10 people who are helping, then a lot of work is getting done already.


SPEAKER_17:
I just see a chat showing up.

People, somebody said people sleep.

So apparently some are.


SPEAKER_12:
I don't think you or I do.

So at least two out of three on this call don't.


SPEAKER_02:
I did get a little bit more sleep.

I was just noticing when I woke up, I'm like, wait, there was a whole shred of, I'm gonna have to have my coffee first before I catch up with everything.

And so on that note, it's great to see that there's at least three teams already formed.

So kudos.

I also got the note from Sean that there is already one group that has submitted their form.

That is great.

Please make sure we do wanna see those forms being submitted by 6 p.m.

PST.

So whatever that time zone means for you, I need to make sure the time zone is correct.

Chris, for instance, for me, this is not 6 p.m.

PST because I'm in East Coast.

So just check the time zone and let us know if there's any questions.

But hopefully this is a different way that's going to help you find your different people better.

Yes, Dan.


SPEAKER_12:
Yeah, just one other thing.

And the teams who are working and are in Jitsi's maybe aren't listening to us.

So this can be just something that we also make sure to note down.

But on the form, it will ask everyone's Keybase username who's entering.

And so we do understand that people might get added or leave.

And also, I'm sure a lot of the teams that are currently in the Jitsi are just aligning on the question.

and getting their membership roster just to fill out the form.

Multiple people have indicated that they're still just deciding on the exact question, how does complexity science inform the approach?

So it's an hour and 40 minutes left before we're really looking to see a lot of people in teams already.

So we're chilling on time.


SPEAKER_02:
And you're absolutely right, because even in an in-person session, I mean, for those who have attended any hackathon type of events, we usually buffer in two to three hours of people just mingling and going to one another, knocking on doors, saying, I heard you pitch that.

I am curious.

Can you tell?

Oh, actually, no, I'm not interested.

Let me go to that team, right?

It takes time to navigate.

So whatever you're going through, that's we're just experiencing that in a virtual way.

So, you know, pace yourself, navigate, ask questions.

And, you know, I'm going to actually circle back in, Dan and JP, ask you a question, because another thing that I was thinking about is right now.

Yes, these channels that we have available is explore as you have.

explained earlier, that's where we can explore and talk about, but is it correct to assume that when they form teams and they have confirms, they will have a separate channel so they can continue to dive a little bit deeper and more easily?

Is that true?


SPEAKER_05:
And how would that work?

Dan, I'll let you take that one.

Go ahead, JP.

What do you think, Monica?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, I thought the forum was, the channel was going to be created, but I wanted to confirm from both of your side.


SPEAKER_12:
The channel for what, sorry?


SPEAKER_02:
For the teams, once they form teams because they want to continue conversations.


SPEAKER_12:
Yes.

So the channel for the teams that are registered, those are going to be basically the sub-channels within complexweekend.may2020 are the recombination space where the ideas are coming together.

And then people are kind of moving off into Jitsis to form new teams.

So the actual research and projects that are being carried out by the team, we're not going to be a member of that team.

So that's in the group's private space where they can make their own sub channels that reflect whatever they need.


SPEAKER_02:
Perfect.

Perfect.

So as you have all heard this, you know, keep forming those teams.

If you're not seeing it in the public channel, that's why, because it's probably been created privately.

So reach out to make sure that you are part of those teams.

And if you have a team that's already made, please let us know so that we can make sure that we know you are there because we can't see it.

because of your privacy to honor that and you know highlight here for instance so that way there's others there who's like oh wait i'm interested in misinformation i want to check that out so that they can join as well um and i think with that we got a good start i am seeing some good uh progress here i see some post-its that's great i'm sure even in the keyword education you can even go

in different ways because there's a whole range.

Same with any of these keywords.

But start a group conversation.

Explore where you want to take it.

And I hope this was helpful.

So thank you for tuning in and exploring how we find teams in this virtual time.


SPEAKER_12:
Awesome, Monica.

JP, we're going to still hang out and just see what's up and keep it live.

I'm down.

I'm down.


SPEAKER_07:
Very much so.

I mean, this is an interesting, always an interesting, exciting process.

I think on my end, I mean, as I said, I'm so used to this in-person stuff that I'm really curious about, really curious and actually pretty supportive of the Catholic mingling as well.

And to that effect, I mean, I think that's why the online chat space is really important for us.

Want to see people in there.

And I'll be there later tonight.

So I want to see people there hanging out.


SPEAKER_12:
What would be a good place for us to just jump off?

Because we've had great times in person.

We've also had great times online.

And it's the long term connect that we make that help us gain perspective on ourselves, gain perspective on the complexity community on these topics.

What do you think this meeting space of online

How can we create long term relationships and how will it be similar to something where you've met the person in person or not?


SPEAKER_07:
I've said this before, kind of in our in our conversations, but I'll bring it to the forefront for the public now.

But I think it's kind of like you create the space of a river, right, where you the river is constantly changing.

Yet it's always there if you want to go to it.

And I'm really a fan of.

like right now how people are using, you know, using or, or being away from the live stream.

Um, we're, we're here in the background, like always, always present.

And so our online space, both like in person like this, um, online town and the key base, it always acts as that river and we can, we can tap back into it.

And, um, I, I'm a, I'm a big fan of, um, you know, in, in,

Just, you know, I really want to just do like a general complex education thing because we have this idea of the strength of weak ties.

For those of you who haven't heard of that, it's related to six degrees of separation, you know, the small world phenomena where we're all just a couple of people apart.

And this is really the environment where, hey, Jenny,

This is really the environment where the strength of becomes paramount in how and where we go forward.

We have an international body of people right now who, by and large, didn't know each other before, are going to be roughly connected after this.

And even if we go forward,

with a couple of teams, as long as those teams remain attached and remain a center, that's the valuable thing for all of us is we are now connected loosely and roughly.

And I mean, this is our product, right?

Going forward, like Flexity Weekend is our project, creating this community and seeing how it can have these far reaching subtle effects down the road.

So that's what I'm,


SPEAKER_12:
about most interested in awesome so let's um keep the discussion live with uh two or at least two maybe even two or more guests um chen ling welcome so we're just hanging out talking with jp and right now the people who are uh listening to this are looking for a team or they just want to break away from their other brainstorming hey jared

So maybe we could start, I'm going to start with just briefly after that cute intro, I'm going to mute Jared, but make sure, okay, he made himself perfect.

Chenling, is there anything you wanted to ask or just talk about?


SPEAKER_15:
What were you guys talking about earlier?


SPEAKER_12:
Well, we were talking about the general differences between meeting in person and meeting online.

How will we carry through and make this long-term community and set of projects work?

And so you gave a bunch of the facilitation talks today, the 30-minute workshops.

How did they go?

How was it similar or different than in-person teaching?

How similar or different were the different sessions?


SPEAKER_15:
So...

I guess the presentation and remote is very different to me because I feel like it was much harder for me to gauge the audience response, especially because I have one screen.

So basically I saw my own slides and I didn't really have any real time feedback.

What was kind of cool was that it's a very small talk.

Oh my God, those are awesome.

At the end of the talk, I feel like people get to ask questions and I try to, when I give talk, I try to like give only five minutes for questions.

I really felt like because we had such a small group, it was more useful to just almost just give an overview of what I'm interested in and then leave a lot of time for questions.

people to ask questions that they wanted to ask and talk about topics more in depth that people actually care about.

And yeah, I guess in terms of group forming, I wonder, I'm kind of curious to see like in the groups, what kind of topic will people be interested in?

Or like if the information that I gave in the talk will actually be useful to people.


SPEAKER_12:
Interesting.

So as far as teaching goes, how do we assess teaching in our current situation where all of a sudden a lot of the education is looking more like a person in a video call trying to manage feedback on a laptop screen and less like a setup that we had in person?

So how do we take some of the insights as educators and as learners that we're


SPEAKER_15:
getting out of here by experiencing it from so many different angles and bring that to the remote education or in person beyond that's really good question i guess what i really appreciated about the the online education is that i feel like everybody had a more equal access to talk because i think in real life classrooms some people are more comfortable speaking up

And some people aren't and they're learners whose first language is in English, which was me when I started in the US.

And I think having the chat and the video call on at the same time was really helpful.

I would say like for me, if I were to do another remote teaching, I will definitely get more screens.

So I think that's crucial to have.

kind of one screen for monitoring yourself, one screen for looking at the response of all the participants and one other screen for the actual text chat.

And I think as human, we do analyze a lot more information than just the kind of the words, the spoken words, even though that's like usually what people focus on.

So I guess in the new age,

new age of remote teaching, we need to train our brain to tune into all the other sources of information that isn't like body language or facial expressions.

But I think we do have the capacity to tune into a lot more information that we think we're able to.


SPEAKER_12:
Cool.

Jared, you want to mention anything?


SPEAKER_08:
I think Chenling kind of got it there.

It's a pretty complete answer.


SPEAKER_12:
Well, it's a paradox that we return to in the planning and also in some sessions, which is that intercultural communication means being very clear with what you're saying and giving a very generous unpacking to people's words because a word that you might, you know, very exciting versus a little bit exciting, that kind of nuance just can often get washed out.

And so it's really important to be clear with what you're saying.

And then what we hear in listicle format and in so many other places is, well, just use rich digital media, just use video, use your tone of voice, use your body language.

And the truth is not everybody is watching your little icon or not everybody's able to pick up these nuances.

And so it just really this weekend has made me rethink and reflect on a lot of these

technological solutions to technological problems instead of saying like, hey, if you just gave the person three seconds and the benefit of the doubt, then you wouldn't need to be asking whether you need to change your video filter or your lighting because people are going to get it that you're in whatever situation you're in.

So if you don't come to the remote communication with that kindness first, then it's all these tech solutions to tech problems.

And that's just not how problems get solved.


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, it seems like there is an emergent or at least a potential for an emergent culture surrounding this sort of online remote interactions where a new kind of etiquette seems like it will be required in order to enable clarity.


SPEAKER_07:
JP?

Yeah, so one thing that's really striking me about this entire event that I think is really special is it's important to remember we're doing this real time live worldwide.

And that's something that I think is quite different than most of the other attempts that have been done out there, especially in the education sphere, which is a lot of canned talks.

Go to YouTube or go to this.

which are great, right?

But this is a chance for us to get involved in real time, see what people's questions are.

And the power of the online space is we're able to quickly put up information that people are interested in.

Because the neat thing about the complexity space is it is so diverse.

We're able to kind of instantly refer on to

you know, more technical aspects.

I wish I could find my correct note from earlier, but somebody was giving a talk about like component analysis or something like that, or they mentioned it pretty briefly.

I'm like, I don't know much about this.

And then I Googled, you know, basic intro to this and it just pops up immediately.

So that's the fun part about these kind of mixed or, you know, live spaces.

We're able to get a lot of information really quickly and then we're able to go off on our own.

and do our own more in-depth research.

So that makes me really hopeful for teams as well, you know, for what they're interested in going forward.

So, you know, the resources are just amazing out there.


SPEAKER_12:
Jared, I have a question speaking to your local ecosystem of cognition.

What do you think would be effective versions of complexity education for very young people?

Because a lot of times the way that we describe complexity is it's interdisciplinary or it's transdisciplinary or it's what academia is leaving behind in the cracks or it's the gap between theory and practice.

however we wanted to talk about it, but it's often contrasted with other adult systems, maybe a failing adult system, maybe some other inadequate one, but you can't really just tell a child like, I'm rejecting something that you don't even know that much about.

Or is that what we tell them?

So how does it inform your style or what kinds of tools could be done to help high throughput the complexity education outside of the household?


SPEAKER_08:
I think that complexity education should be like mathematics.

Maybe even, I won't say a part of mathematics, but it should be universal.

And I think it starts at a very early stage.

You can talk to children about the way that plants grow or the way that ants behave.

How did that plant find the sun?


SPEAKER_05:
Let me put her down.

She's kind of noisy.

I'll be right back.


SPEAKER_15:
Thanks for the ideas about introducing complexity to really young children.

I find it quite interesting that we get to see this aspect of your life that if you were to show up to a real life conference that we probably wouldn't get to see.

And I think it's actually really good that like we get this glimpse into other people's life that, and it brings up questions that maybe

doesn't show up, like, doesn't come up in our brain without that unique kind of experience.


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, it's easy, I think, in the traditional office environment to depersonalize humans, right?

Like, you think of a person as their work output.

You look at them as just the face that they present to you in a meeting, rather than a dad or a boyfriend or whatever else they may be.

or a girlfriend or a mom or anything else.


SPEAKER_12:
What do you think about that, JP?

Having been involved with a lot of really top-notch complexity education from the group, small group, almost direct transmission of complexity as far as the feeling that can arise to the kinds of high production publications and online experiences.

Where do you see that space evolving?


SPEAKER_07:
I think to Jared's point, you know, we all, we all are reduced to being humans grasping with our technologies right now.

Um, you know, I, I, I really appreciate, you know, Chen Ling was, uh, I think you're working from the kitchen at, at the house.


SPEAKER_12:
She's in the kitchen of Sasha and I's apartment.


SPEAKER_07:
Exactly.

You know, at the apartment, I'm just really appreciating, like there's this, there's this, um,

you kind of pop in circumstance or, you know, to, to traditional research and especially the academia that I think is being rethought of where, you know, we're all coming together as a genuine kind of geeks in our own houses, like stripping all that bear and like just getting to the science.

I mean, granted, we all have our own, um, uh, way of displaying our little window to the world.

Uh, so I think that's cool.

Um, my, my place that I've always been and,

you both know this very well, is kind of balancing the human side of research or the human side of complexity and whatnot or the complexity of community with the formal side.

And I think it's actually important to have both those aesthetics.

I mean, as freewheely and loosey-goosey as I seem to be sometimes, I really enjoy the formal rigor of it.

I really enjoy kind of presenting what you've done to others and like, huzzah,

you know, in a, in a non, um, in a non, um, judgmental way, but there's still a sense of ceremony.

Um, I'm a big believer in, um, structure where it's necessary.

And oftentimes, you know, the ceremonies we have like Jared's birthday for, um, you know, these things are, these things are important for the human side, um, as well as, um,

I guess giving us all something to believe in, you know?

So identity is important.

I'm sure Luke can talk to that as well.

So I don't know if that thoroughly answered the question.

But yeah, remember, I mean, at the end of the day, this goes out to, this is kind of a point that I've made a couple of times along the conference.

At the end of the day, even to put this thing together, we're a couple of people with,

laptops, desktop machines, and smartphones, kind of using free resources, putting it all together, crafting a structure to it, and making it happen.

I mean, for being free, the production value of what we're doing is really, really high.


SPEAKER_12:
I agree.

We owe one to YouTube for sharing the YouTube video for the music intro and then live streaming directly and having high resolution archival live streaming around the world at zero cost, zero visible cost, high indirect cost on many, many dimensions.

JP?


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah.

That's another important aspect of what we're doing is if somebody out there, I mean, I'm just thinking somebody out there is like really frustrated or somebody out there is like really something, let us know how to improve.

I mean, this is your conference and let us know what's going on.

Is there any things, you know, maybe it was an oversight, like it's now 4 a.m.

in India, for instance.

Maybe there's some oversights we missed.

How do we improve?

How do we make this whole thing work for you?

Because as well as if you see something that needs to be done, let's get it done.


SPEAKER_12:
Agreed.

Jared, anything else you wanted to talk about?


SPEAKER_13:
You could ask us a question.

You can request a question.


SPEAKER_05:
I noticed...


SPEAKER_08:
I was wondering what you guys thought of this whole experience.

Is it what you expected?

Do you think that we're meeting our goals in terms of educating our attendees?

What do you think?


SPEAKER_13:
JP, you want to go?


SPEAKER_07:
Sure.

I think by way of if we're catching this as a complexity hackathon, I think we're hitting those metrics.

Are we hitting complexity education checkboxes, if you will?

That's a tough question because by nature of these things, by nature of this one itself, and you saw this last year, you kind of see ideas and you see where they develop eventually.

So we'll see is my answer, which is kind of a way of copping out.

I mean, I'm really one for like,

you know, splitting the group into like, here's the absolute beginners who need to know what a major case model is and have an introduction to chaos theory.

And then we have the professors on this side of the room who are already off and running with their own projects.

So given that we're in an interesting online space and like right now I literally can see three people and there are a lot of people way out there hidden to me.

That's where I'm kind of like feeling,

the isolation.

Because I'm used to, in the online space, a traditional online course or something like that, where we have these checkboxes.

You have tests at the end.

You have all this structure.

But the other thing I have to remember, this is nothing with benefit.

I don't think there's anything

detrimental to what we're doing so uh you know this this this event would work if it was four people and it would work if it was 400 people so to rip off something so


SPEAKER_12:
the do no harm approach to community organization.

Yeah, and Jared, I noticed just your text-based mentoring with some very, very pointed questions.

Do you wanna produce a report, a program, art, website, a research paper?

It's like,

All right, lay down the cards.

Who's at the table?

What's the game that we're playing here?

But after you know who's at the table, it's time to talk about the game and then the rules of the game and then the style and then all these other things later.

But get the table set.

And then what game are we playing?

It's just really a direct approach.

It works very well through text and it just opens the space.

And even though it's in the supply chain channel, it breaks supply chain thinking, which is like logistics, networks, dynamical systems.

And it's like, but

But it's actually going to be about the quality of your communication in the report.

It might not come down to having the most explanatory model.

It might come down to the visualization that all the mainstream media puts everywhere.

And so your meme ends up going deep, not because you had the best model, but because you brought the right team together and you understood that the problem was inherently transdisciplinary.

and intermodal as far as quantitative ways to frame it and more humanitarian or humanities aspects as well.


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, I would remark before going that a major part of every scientist's job is communication.

And it's often those things that are communicated best that are the longest lasting and have the greatest effect.

With that, I'll sign off.

Thanks for having me, guys.


SPEAKER_12:
Thank you, Jared.

Talk to you later.

Cool, so JP, Yua, and Chenling, how are you doing?

Do you wanna have any thoughts, remarks, questions?


SPEAKER_15:
Yeah, I sort of like what JP was saying earlier that this is like a nonjudgmental space for research because I feel like in science, everything is judged, right?

That's the whole goal of having science, like peer review is you being judged

your entire career is you getting judged at every step.

Your qualifying exam and like your committee meetings is all people trying to evaluate you or trying to evaluate your ideas.

But as a scientist, it's really difficult to separate that out from like people judging you as a person and

having this space is interesting because most of the people here are new people, which is another thing that's exciting about this weekend for me is I haven't met strangers in a really long time.

And so like this environment, I think it's fundamentally different from the scientific community that we've interacted with.

And hopefully this leads to building, you know, long-term relationships that later

will recognize people like this year's conference.

I'm recognizing people who facilitated last year and that's really exciting.

But then the different thing that's unique to this experience is like, these are people that you've never met and they're here to really support the land.

You're here to explore things together, which was, yeah, which is really cool.

And someone.


SPEAKER_07:
Yep.

Go ahead, JP.

Kind of why I'm an evangelist for, let's go there, let's call it the complexity movement.

As I think, and that's kind of like one of the, like complexity is this like giant thing we can put things into and that like in a new paradigm maybe, whether it is or not, if you do what it is.

Which is why I'm really happy with Complexity's idea.

That's the one I constantly push in exploratory science.

It's the ability to create a space where you can ask interesting, funny, groovy questions or high risk questions without any kind of downside or failure.

And that's what the community assists with as well.

So maybe that's just my plug for people wondering about becoming involved in this community whose first experience is here, but that's kind of where the community is.

And then it goes on, take what you do here and then filter it up to higher academia and let those things be judged.

But create a base, a foundation in this space and then filter it on up.


SPEAKER_12:
Here's one other thought on that.

Hey, Zargum.

I'll save the thought for after Zargum has completed whatever you'd like to hang out and talk about.

Do you have anything you want to start off with?


SPEAKER_03:
To be honest with you, I just came in to join the conversation just for people's reference.

We have a facilitator channel running and we're trying to help you guys out and I answered the sort of general summons to discussion.

So please continue and I'll...


SPEAKER_12:
Great.

I'll throw out a take and you'll be in a unique position to, I think, answer it and speak to it.

One thing that I noted in the movement from undergraduate education and earlier to grad school,

was that in the undergraduate and earlier stages of education, it was short-term positive feedback, just from a neurological perspective.

Like you'd study for the test and then you'd do well.

Or even at the quarterly timescale, just a few weeks, you'd work really hard and you'd see your results for that quarter right then.

Then for graduate school, it's like they pull out the rug and all of a sudden it's long-term negative feedback.

You do the experiment and four years later, the reviewer says you should have done it differently.

Not only is it very delayed, but it's actually usually critical feedback, negative feedback.

It's just not how the body learns.

The body learns from short-term positive feedback, which is why people get addicted to swiping one game or the other, and it's a little bit harder to get addicted to peer review.

But still, not recommended to everybody.

Sorry, go ahead.

And then just to complete the sort of return, complexity science and the community that we actually have here, it actually reminded me of taking it almost beyond the short termness of undergraduate where I felt like I was getting very short term, very positive feedback, but it wasn't just hot air.

We're not just trying to make each other feel good.

It's really short term positive feedback because it's corrective and it's educational and it's built around sharing and improving with this rapid turnaround.

that's unlike any other type of education that I've participated in.


SPEAKER_03:
That's really interesting.

So I'm going to take a long take on this because there's a lot in there.

So the first part about undergrad versus grad school, I absolutely agree with you, though I think there's some interesting relations to real life where most of the time you really don't get a lot of short-term sort of positive feedback either.

So grad school feels a little bit more like the open unstructured world and figure out what you want to do and kind of build your own incentives and

your own motivation, whereas undergraduate is a little bit more like coached along to get you to do something that maybe you're not intrinsically motivated to do.

And as a result, people who go through grad school largely succeed if they're very intrinsically motivated.

But overall, I think there's an interesting phenomena

which is the sort of like that various time scales of incentives.

So I'm a technically trained control theorist.

So everything's got a frequency domain representation.

And I tend to think that sort of non-degenerate frequency domain distributions are really important.

So it's not all fast and it's not all slow and it's about sort of a right mixture.

In a way, the community having fast feedback, fast positive feedback that's inducing sort of short-term outputs is really, really great.

And it can really help jumpstart enthusiasm, jumpstart projects, and even jumpstart outcomes.

But the kinds of systems change that we want to realize in the world actually have some inherently slow dynamics to them.

And so we do also have to cultivate the sort of intrinsic motivation and to be able to both

sort of persevere through negative feedback whether it's small small failures and learning from them or whether it's sort of longer term systems maybe not working out uh the way that we had hoped or the way that we had thought um but ultimately in all those time scales actually developing a sort of

you know, a growth mindset and like a joy of learning so that even when you get a sort of negative feedback, you know, and I mean that in the sense of sort of criticism, that you're actually learning from that and actually taking something positive from the learnings.

And as a result, kind of, again, cultivating a sort of positive outlook and positive utility function over the whole dynamic process, both in the short term and in the long term.


SPEAKER_15:
Can I say something?

So in terms of the undergraduate education on like kind of the international perspective, U.S.

is very unique in this short-term vast for undergraduate degree, because in most European countries and also in China, I don't know that many about many other places.

Usually as an undergrad, you have like a final or at most a midterm and a final.

And no one checks your homework.

Like in the U S when I came here, I was like, whoa, I have to hand in a homework every week.

And if I don't hand it in, it's going to end up on my transcript versus everywhere else you're assigned homework.

And you don't have to do them if you don't want to, no one checks.

And then if you fuck up the final, that's half your grade and like that.

So I think it's kind of interesting for me maybe to compare

the outcome of what students in the US do and the students elsewhere do.

And this is citing one of my friend who did his undergrad in the UK.

His words is that the US students waste so much time doing useless tasks that their professors think is useful, but isn't actually useful for them.

And they get sort of carried away in this struggle to do well in those classes with no time to think about what they actually want to do.

And I think that

would be interesting.


SPEAKER_03:
That resonates with me a lot, actually.

I mean, a couple things.

One is that in my PhD program, I think the vast majority of the international students outperformed, at least at the course and qualifying exam level, the American students, the ones with American undergraduate degrees.

And I think broadly speaking, we have a sort of hyper gamified, like hyper metricized and hyper gamified scenario when you basically say, here's all these subtasks and we're going to grade you on them.

And, you know, it's like over optimizing subroutines.

And as a result, you can't have as much adaptation to context.

And so I generally prefer a more open environment, but I would imagine the pattern of providing a skeleton structure and saying, here's what I think you should do as the professor, but then like to the extent that that helps you learn and prepare

um great and if it doesn't you do something else then ultimately there's a sort of you know a measurement of whether you succeeded in the final as you say or honestly more generally i don't i'm not even overly sold on sort of grades metrics as the approach to education simply because i feel like i've learned the most in environments where that wasn't the thing hanging over my head


SPEAKER_12:
Yeah.

And just to hinge on that gamification question, in many ways, academia was pre-gamified with very specific metrics and the idea of a publication.

And it was a long range game.

It was like correspondence chess.

And then the way that our students are playing chess today, so to speak, is like the phone's vibrating and smells and lights are coming out of it.

And if you don't move in 10 seconds, you're going to get because it's going to tell your social circle.

So you're going to lose some imaginary point.

Where is the line where there's incentive structures that exist, yet the gamification is not total and it's not fragmentating our attention?

JP, and then Zargan.

Go ahead, Zargan.

Okay, go ahead, Zargan first.


SPEAKER_03:
I was just going to say that this comes right back to the point about frequency domain composition of a system.

What you're talking about is consistently shifting, like, the same process into a faster, like,

you know, sort of setting.

And so the frequency domain aspect of a system has a lot of the characteristics of its stability, of its properties.

And so although we might think, oh, we're doing the same stuff, having to do the same stuff faster is going to change the way that system behaves in a really meaningful way, and maybe in not the way that we want.


SPEAKER_07:
So, I mean, I'm in agreement with all this.

I mean, that's why I'm happy with the complexity space existing kind of couched or adjacent to academia as well.

And I think it serves the purpose of like the yin within the yang or the yang within the yin really, really well in academia.

I really, I mean, I'm not a trainee.

I'm not trained in academia.

I'm kind of discovered all this stuff on my own.

But I still really like having the shell of like, you know, formality and serious science.

And then like, within all this, we have our interesting creative space.

And to me, it's always this interplay between those two, those two tensions, right?

So this, so the idea of

Well, I guess like the idea of SFI and Santa Fe, it's a place that people can go to decompress from their usual spot.

Or it's a nice place for a sabbatical.

It's a nice place to spend two weeks.

It's just this like, finally I can be free of all this, have some space to think, and then get back to it.

And I think that it's important to have that push and pull relationship or that pull and pull tension between

this totally unstructured, creative free space, and this very, very rigid hierarchical formal area.

And the two play off of each other very nicely.

So I've always flourished in the area of, yes, we do good science.

We do very serious science.

We do very proper science.

And this is your place to play for now, free of judgment, free of things.

But don't just stop there.

Even as we're creating our toy models, our toy models can inform the world.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, and play includes the ability to fail sort of safely, right?

So the idea of play is an environment in which, you know, you don't have to have quite so high a sort of negative association with something not working out how you expected, which is inherently better for exploration.

Because in environments with high cost of failure, it leads to sort of an exploit mentality and you game the metrics that are out there.

And in an environment where you relax the cost of failure, you open the opportunity to follow a more like explore type algorithm.

And then in doing so, you can discover new things.

And that's actually, you know, part of science.

So if you're too onerous in your sort of way of framing what is, you know, formal or right or appropriate, you lose the opportunity to discover things that are, you know, maybe orthogonal to the thinking prior.


SPEAKER_07:
Right drunk, edit sober, I think is...


SPEAKER_12:
Another metaphor there is the madman, the architect, and the interior designer.

So design wildly and ideate creatively.

And then architecture is about making everything come together in the right way.

And then interior design, just the fine adjustment that really makes it livable.

Welcome to Monica.

So we're so lucky to have not just 20 awesome facilitators, but three of them on the call with us right now.

So Monica or Zaryum or Chenling, is there anything that you want to ask each other or bring up anything?


SPEAKER_15:
Yes.

So I kind of want to spin off what JP was saying about the SFI being just like a very unstructured space.

and that people are able to relax.

So I'm like, okay, like I'm gonna spin it.

So don't show the heart too soon.

For me, it was almost, it was like relaxing in one way, but like stressful in another, because in academia, you know what you're doing, you know what your next step is.

And people will tell you if you took the wrong step.

In SFI, I'm constantly being like, this could be a good idea.

This could be completely stupid and not feasible.

And

And people who actually do research on this probably knows a ton and I'm reinventing the wheel and all these doubts that could come in.

Because in my own research, I'm like, yeah, I'm the expert in the world.

I'm working with the expert in the world.

But in SFI, I was constantly being like, maybe this has been done in the 90s.

And that was like a buzzer.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah.

That stress is something I actually enjoy.

And you have this growth phase, right?

And then you have this withering phase that kind of forces things to take structure and take its channel to where it's...

what we'll call it like the natural course or not quite the course of least resistance, but like the natural course of development is you can't just have this incredible, like formulate growth exponentially, right?

You have to have this force that stresses things and you have to have this force that keeps things like questions, not like academia, which is like way, way pressure down, but just a little bit of like shock to, to, to, to get things, um, realistic I'll say.

Um, so that's, that's kind of, um,

Queuing onto that was actually an essential part of the program, as well as the length of the program that we all did.

For those of you who don't know, this is the complex at the summer school in Santa Fe, which is a four-week residential program that's like a giant inflated version of what we're doing here.

A bunch of people from around the world forming, creating projects, basically, with seed talks and some shared truth elements.

One interesting thing that I can think of is I went to a talk one time and it was a computer scientist giving a talk on like generated social meaning or generated social channels.

And then somebody raised their hand in the back

uh, or comments, excuse me, not raise their hand in the back, but like commented to me privately is like, they just rediscovered this thing that's been known in social sciences for the past 30 years, you know, but they discovered it independently on their own, like through this interesting other way.

Um, you know, so if they, if they had like a more diverse group, uh, like stressing a little bit or, or many eyes on the, on the, on the

on their project, it would have been known and sort of wasted all this incredible time on this one very channeled project.


SPEAKER_03:
Yep.

Zargum?

Well, I wanted to sort of comment too on complexity science as a field and this concept of epistemic trespassing, which is where you basically take expertise in one area and you kind of step into another area and you really are coming from outside and you aren't an expert, but maybe your expertise is different and that provides you a different perspective.

And so the process of mixing has a similar character to what we've been talking about, where there's a sort of exploration phase where you kind of reach beyond the boundaries of what

what you know but apply it to something new that maybe someone else knows and then the process of reconciling what you learned you know with what is known already can sometimes provide new and powerful leaps and sometimes it collapses back to oh yeah that's what they already knew or sometimes it can actually create frictions where

The different perspective arises with a fundamentally different conclusion.

And I honestly believe that this is where a lot of the leaps come from.

But the challenge is that it also comes with a lot of failures of the form.

Oh, hey, it turns out what I thought was wrong and other failures of the form.

Oh, hey, they already knew that.

And so in a way you're taking a different kind of leap and so you kind of have to be prepared for what that looks like and I think that in particular complexity science is full of people who like to attach attack problems that way and so you got to build up a certain kind of skill set and a certain type of Resilience to be able to sort of be successful with that type of research Monica


SPEAKER_12:
Being involved with entrepreneurship and ultimately at the highest level, what kinds of insights are you seeing here that you want to take back into your communities as well as things that they've figured out that we could also learn from?


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you for asking that.

You know, it's like I shared a few times throughout the conversation, both jokingly, but also in seriousness, the complexity terminology in itself is new to me.

But what I found really relatable is that it's at the essence, really reframing your thinking.

And having the curiosity to recognize how you connect patterns in different ways.

And that's something actually a lot of entrepreneurs have been doing for a very long time.

It's just that we don't have that science and research kind of framework of thinking.

And so it's been interesting how like, oh, I totally get it.

Except I think I was just even thinking, JP, when you were earlier, it must have been even yesterday or maybe today, the days are now blurring.

But when you were sharing the example of when, you know, hey, if we get stuck, what was the model that you were saying that you just, there was a different word that you said, you just used a different iteration process.

And in business language, we say pivot, right?

If something stuck, you just pivot.

You're supposed to, what was the word?

Say it one more time.


SPEAKER_07:
Percolation.

Yes.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.


SPEAKER_07:
Or Sean used Plinko, but it's this process where something is, I mean, the generalized model, right, is like something is falling down and it encounters a point of resistance.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_07:
And so it goes laterally until it finds the next weak point, and then it goes down further, and this is just an iterative process, so.


SPEAKER_02:
And as a visual person, like I appreciated you like showing it with emotion because if you just said it verbally, it would have been a harder time.

And you sharing that demonstrates like, oh, that's that's basically business pivot.

And so, you know, Dan, as you're asking that, I've been even reflecting and thinking about like, wow, it's so humbling and exciting to recognize.

Like, I really hope there's more events like this where it is just really attracting a large audience.

diverse demographic from all different generations.

Even for me, one of the things I've been kind of thinking a lot is, you know, just being honest and recognizing that professional learning is going to change forever.

People are not going to hire people to do 10, 20K projects like they did before because now everything is remote and the expectation of what that both the cost and the bandwidth and the type of work is going to be very different.

and yet the actual solution is still needed and so as we're noticing even in our engagement yes there are certain things that we can do in person and why certain expertise and needed but i think because of kobe 19 and where things are we're really as what i'm excited to ask a little bit deeper is like what are then now

additional skills that we will really need to navigate in addition to all the existing talent you had to navigate in this changing landscape.

And I think this time period to do this complex weekend as a result is really a fitting time because if you thought your world and your skills is enough to navigate,

this is your wake-up call it's it's not and i think it's really powerful to recognize why it's so important to take the time to learn um and as entrepreneurs even if that's something that we're good at and getting comfortable with uncomfortable something that i train people to do it's a whole other attitude to really stay open-minded to know that you will make mistakes but through that how do you have the patience and the persistence and the humility to know that i will still get there because i have a problem that i want to solve

and i'm not going to walk in with an agenda and so kind of diverged on from what you were asking but those are kind of train of thoughts that i've been thinking a lot about and just you know going back to that question and statement even from friday of how do we all make sure we keep showing up without

assuming that we already know everything that we're not the expert at everything we do and just bringing our core value to the game but staying open-minded and a lot of the projects that i've been even doing for my business and the work that i do and seeing people who are thriving right now

We're seeing it's that people who are doing that, walking into spaces with an open mind and just saying that this is what I do well, this is what I care about.

I'm ready for what the world wants me to do.

And I will solve.

I will pivot.

I will iterate.

And I will be prepared and be flexible.

And I think by post-COVID-19, the leaders who are really going to

look up to and appreciate it's going to be people who really have that skill set and so that adaptability and flexibility which we're seeing constantly throughout this weekend and so just want to emphasize on that and that's something that i think we're going to see significantly more on leaders as a skill that we need jp or jargon i mean i agree vehemently


SPEAKER_12:
Yeah, I think in speaking to how do we move it beyond the direct experience, take it into all these places where the mindset will almost always work with really all ages in all situations.

If you just said,

Hey, can we slow down and take account of the system and take other perspectives?

People will generally get you.

But it's some of the words and some of the models.

And so complexity, and this is what we were just remarking on last night, was we're putting it into the crucible.

We do want the beginner and the expert self-perceived.

And in some ways, complexity was pre-adapted to that kind of a space, not because we were predicting black swan events or rare events, you know, long tail events.

All these are just jargon.

So it's not that complexity was predicting rare events or pre-adapting with jargon that's now especially crucial.

It's that coming to terms with uncertainty and being able to take that control theory plus radical uncertainty and just even from...

learning, the way that they made discussing models and iterating through models a qualitative question, and it just made the clarity of thought so accessible, but also recognizing that you're going to have to dip into the numbers at some point.

Zargum?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, so I also wanted to add something that I think, you know, you opened up in talking about the sort of the jargon versus the concepts.

And that's that complexity has as one of its strengths, the fact that it's sort of digging at sort of fundamental phenomena rather than necessarily the...

to sort of how we choose to talk about them.

And so one of the things I find most interesting is the extent to which the sort of systems theory concepts actually supersede disciplines.

So you'll notice that the participants in this event come from widely different backgrounds there.

whether they're academic or entrepreneur, they have a set of expertises that were drawn up from like biology or engineering or computer science or anthropology or economics etc.

And I think that it's really incredible to see that there's a sort of horizontal substrate for discussing sort of models and the way that our models affect the way that we think conceptual, mathematical, computational,

Basically, it doesn't really matter.

We're building out an understanding of how we understand the phenomena that we observe and how our expectations about future phenomena impact our decisions today, both as individuals and as a society.

And something really powerful about sort of tuning for sort of that kind of generality, where at the same time trying to be formal and rigorous and scientific about it.


SPEAKER_05:
That's Monica.


SPEAKER_02:
Oh, yes.

So to add to that, the other thing that I want to highlight, oh, am I still on mute?

Oh, okay.

Kind of highlight, you've really been sitting with me for the past few months in particular with COVID-19 is when people are pushed to edge,

It's surprising how we see things with clarity, how uncertain things are.

where inequality is, where we need to see more improvement, where things were well supported, who were prepared, who were not prepared, who felt like they had a grasp of what their team needed to do and how they led.

And especially since I focus a lot with leadership and different types of companies and how they navigate.

And as teams are forming right now, the thing that constantly comes to mind is that at the end of the day,

It's an experience like this that really pushes to remind that, yes, we need more people who build those expertise and technicality.

But if those technicalities are built without core values of a human being, then we're kind of missing a big part.

And so I love that throughout even this whole program, we've been emphasizing a lot of the value points, if I hope people heard, which is that we're not telling you to just go around and say, this is the exact formula of how you build team.

This is exactly the formula you need to do complexity.

Like, no, if you'll rewind all the way to every single person who's spoken since Friday, which I thought was really, really critical, and I hope the participants take away about this, is that to even grasp and make this whole experience meaningful, that value...

focus is really important.

And if you feel like you're kind of feeling a little overwhelmed, take a moment and pause back in, you know, an activity that I like to do, because we are living in a bit of a ambiguity work for many of us where, you know, the entire world 2020 was something that we flipped open.

And that's not what I thought.

So take a moment and just pause.

Take a screen break for five seconds and think about, what do I really care about in life?

What's the value that I want to provide?

What's really something that I can bring to the table in my team or my collaboration or in this whole weekend conversation that is going to be really intentional?

And that could potentially mean that sometimes, oh, I know when I need to step back.

Sometimes I know when I want to step up or sometimes I know when I vouch for somebody else.

And I think it's staying more open to that.

And hopefully, whether it's this event or many other things, I hope this event and experience would permit people to focus on being more human being, not just simply human being.

And I know people are we're keeping people busy right now.

They have multiple ways of engagement.

But I hope they're pacing themselves and thinking about how do we make sure I'm being a human being through this process?

to be a better problem solver because we need absolutely better innovative problem solvers who are being empathetic.


SPEAKER_03:
I'd actually like to sort of build on the concept of the sort of human aspects of whether it's projects or teams or just the work that we're doing in general.

I think that there's something really important about the, again, I'm going to highlight something I think is a little bit different about the complexity community relative to some of my other experiences in projects and hackathons and teams in general, is that there's an emphasis on actually framing problems and scoping things and

sort of asking not just individually about me as a human being, but like my project and how it affects human beings.

And there's an attention to sort of the scope and the models and the assumptions that I don't think often gets enough attention.

And I think far too often you go into a project and, you know, I have experience with sort of

client work and managing research teams that are being paid by external sources and there's an ongoing demand for the thing that's like the artifact or the code lines or the documents and you're like a lot of the time that work is really contingent on something that's a little bit more qualitative and it's like well what are we really trying to accomplish and who are the stakeholders and what are the trade-offs inherent in the system and like how do those trade-offs affect the decisions the behaviors and the needs of the stakeholders and like

all of that kind of sort of fuzzy, often nebulous stuff, unfortunately is a prerequisite for doing good, essentially scientific or technical work.

And if you do not do it, then you are essentially providing something in a vacuum and maybe your model is right for some context, but is that the context we have?

Is that the context that's being applied in?

Well, we don't know.

So why would we recommend that you use it?

And so I can like really resonate with this need to bring the human back into the picture and,

even for very technical work like machine learning projects or system model simulation forecasting problems, if you're not able to sort of first really frame the problem and understand the stakeholders as we've discussed many times here, you're actually skipping to something that now actually loses its value.

And I think it comes back to the way we perceive and measure work, especially in this remotified world where you can't see

the sort of subjective and fuzzy work, the time spent researching, reading, and discussing, and sense-making, and like really coming to, again, this sort of well-scoped thing.

And now that you can't see it, it's easier to devalue it and to not appreciate the sort of time and thought it takes to do it well.

And, you know, and again, I think there's a real opportunity for the members of this community to take that away from them, this way from that, take that away from this weekend and onto the sort of rest of their lives, their projects, their jobs, et cetera.

And like, remember to take a beat and actually think about what assumptions or models they're baking into their work.

and actually make sure that their conclusions and recommendations, et cetera, are reflecting that, and actually where it's necessary, really baking the time into the projects to do the work required to contextualize the work so that it's interpretable and usable after the fact.


SPEAKER_07:
I appreciate what Zargum and Monica are saying, or both of you are saying.

One of the real points of resonance with me is

When COVID-19 hit, it's like our system and our signals were all like heavily scrambled and static and just all this like tons of noise, tons of volatility, like in the global system across the board.

And what an event like this is trying to do, at least how I'm feeling about it, maybe it extends more than just myself, is like trying to reestablish some kind of signal.

Furthermore, in this time of change,

I mean, you're having all these competing things.

I appreciated Garrett's talk because it had that moment of, I have a lot of people who say, well, we'll return to normal.

And that implies we're going to loop back to where things used to be instead of go forward and how much of the old normal is going to look like the new normal.

And it's not to say that the new normal will be all of us locked in our rooms, sheltering in a place forever, because that's simply not feasible.

But there will be a future on the other side of this.

But the most important thing in this period of high volatility, that's when the system, I mean, this is generally speaking, but this is very relevant to what we're doing now, is in periods of high volatility,

and transition phases, that's when the system is most sensitive to perturbations, far-ranging, minute, far-ranging perturbations from minute activities.

So that is, you know, where I'm feeling this group has a lot of potential and a lot of value because, you know, at the end of the day, whether we are

a policy expert with the voice of the people at the top of the world, or whether we are just ourselves trying to make ourselves better, all of that is at play.

And through a minute group in the global scheme of things, like what we are, 150 people maybe, I'm really, really energized and enthused

by those principles and by that way we can take these things forward.

So I'm very much vibing with everything you all are saying.

From signals to short signals to long-term signals, it's the entire space of the problem.

And that does influence the entire range of whatever phase transition that society will undergo in its attempt for a new world.


SPEAKER_02:
And to add to that, yeah, I know one thing that I really resonated a lot is, you know, when you were sharing the example of the noise and the signal, there's always been a lot of destruction because we do live in a very complicated, busy world.

And it's just been exacerbated.

And what I found interesting is that when we are feeling in the midst of such chaos,

It is understandable that we feel lost and we feel a bit isolated.

We feel like we cringe, like our body expresses that.

And so it becomes interesting why certain people still navigate that with clarity and confidence.

how they go about it and why other people take a long time.

And one thing that I've been noticing even in myself that's helping me at least kind of find motivation to wake up not knowing what we might go through, including everyone else who's probably going through this weekend as an individual in their life every day right now,

It's just going back to starting with your knowns and your unknowns.

So one model that I often, I don't know, I call this a model in my head.

It's probably, but I tell you, you know, a tree does not have to declare that it's a tree.

The tree is a tree.

A tree doesn't have to go around and brag to the flower like, hey, I'm a better version of a plant than you because I'm bigger, I'm stronger.

No, the flower is beautiful the way it is.

The tree is good as it is.

But I think about it like if we put some comparisons like that to like,

For analogy, it's a powerful reminder.

And so I tell myself every time when I feel a bit distracted with the noise, if I feel like, oh, do I feel like I need to validate myself?

Do I feel like I need to prove myself at times?

Or whether it's like, do I need to speak my opinion in a group setting when I feel like I'm heard?

I think about, well, the tree doesn't have to go around and keep saying that I'm a tree, I'm a tree.

Just focus on being an amazing tree and people will keep seeing how you grow to be a bigger tree.

and benefit from the value that you provide.

And so I think it's absolutely an important time, not only for this week in conversation, but to continue thinking about how do we find clarity and confidence starts with your known and unknown and just starting with where you are.


SPEAKER_07:
Very much so.

I mean, here comes the connections.

It's like with a tree is a tree, the plant is a plant.

I mean, a healthy forest has all these things.

And to Zargon's point, they all have like different vibrational wavelengths, if you will.

You know, so a healthy forest, you know, if you abstract the trees to, like, the vibrational wavelength, be it, like, what their growth periods are, a healthy forest exhibits this entire healthy spectrum.

Like, that's where you get to the really cool stuff with where complexity goes.

Like,


SPEAKER_03:
Many, many, many spatial and temporal modes are happening all at the same time.

And there's a sort of rich diversity in it.

And I wanted to sort of make a... Go ahead, sorry.


SPEAKER_07:
But that's also an indication of like a healthy system.

So I think that's another key aspect from it.

We had a talk one time where we had our speaker stats on... They're not valid for this group, but you actually have speaker stats on Jitsi.

Like who's talking...

you know just a balance of who's talking and in groups you have this like nice little one-to-one distribution right and i'm like that's a healthy distribution of people you shouldn't have like everybody has their own even distribution like or even even method to talk like people talk to how how much they want to and as long as it's generally healthy go for it so


SPEAKER_03:
I was going to tell a sort of personal version of a story that's going to be a little bit nerdier than Monica's.

But like, I can definitely say that when I was younger, I was very much like, overtuned to the world around me, right?

Like I was responding to

the metrics and the games and the like doing all the things that that like immediately seemed to be the thing that I needed to do to sort of achieve in whatever setting I was currently sitting in.

And then oddly enough, I was like taking relatively sort of math heavy courses on stochastic optimal control, which is a really complicated way of saying solving these sort of dynamic problems about how to make decisions under uncertainty.

You know, you have some

some signals you care about, but then there are many variables you can't observe that you care about and you have to make decisions and the consequences of your decisions aren't totally apparent to you.

There's some very formal mathematical methods for doing this.

And one interesting thing that you learn is that turns out a lot of the time, the best thing to do under uncertainty is to kind of go with the flow.

Like if you have any sort of

constraints on the amount of energy that you have to exert, which is pretty much every resource problem ever is constrained, turns out that if it's not really clear what to do, just keep doing what you're currently doing.

And that when you're actually moving enough to see what's going to happen or the consequences of what you're doing,

you might actuate more consciously in a different direction.

But there's a really, really basic mathematical sort of constrained dynamic optimization for, yeah, no, I just keep doing that.

And go with the flow in a sense.

Don't expend any energy.

Don't actuate.

And there was a moment when that just clicked for me.

And I was like, I still really hardcore about a lot of things.

But now, pretty much anything that's not in my, I really care about that, or I really understand what I want to do here, I just don't.


SPEAKER_12:
Hey, Blue.

Welcome.

Hey.

How are you doing?

Any thoughts, remarks, questions?


SPEAKER_11:
Yeah, I mean, I'm always having thoughts, right?

No, yeah, it's good.

It was a good experience.

It was, you know, I gave, like, four sessions, which was crazy because they were all so different.

The first one was, like, massively technical problems, like, awesome.

But once you get over, like, that hump, then, like, the second two were good.

And then the last one, like, only had one person in it.

So that was kind of weird.

I don't know.

End of the day, people kind of...


SPEAKER_12:
I think some people started moving into different rooms because the distribution was started even and then became disequilibrated.

But the kind of fun thing is it's not like you're with the cool kids to be in the larger Jitsi.

Really, you're having a one-on-one experience with such an amazing facilitator to have that.

I don't know.

It kind of upsets the incentive structure of the middle school lunch table.


SPEAKER_11:
Yeah.

The cool kids can't sit in the back of the class, right?

They can't just sit in and listen.

There's no lurkers or whatever.

But yeah, it was fun.

I don't know.

It's good.

It's neat to see all the people and to see them all bubbling up ideas and whatever.

I didn't realize this was like a facilitator live stream.

I guess everybody else is busy, right?


SPEAKER_12:
Yeah, I mean, if an attendee wanted to, well, the attendees are mostly working on their teams, hopefully, and this is the few people who either are just taking a break away from their teams, as well as we want to be serious about including people across different time zones.

And so maybe while we're all asleep, there's going to be a ton of chat activity and people who want to join teams, which is why JP, we'll really make sure that we list the teams to join the Jitsi URLs for each of these groups and what they're still looking for, as well as just teams such as the ones that are on the Jamboard.

that are just totally all comers are welcome because there is a sizable fraction of people who are going to be experiencing this live stream maybe while they're reading through our chat messages and so it's just going to be a little bit different timing but we're all getting the same experience in the end yeah i'll have to pop in because i really don't sleep very much and so i'll have to pop in like you know when i wake up at three in the morning or something


SPEAKER_07:
Nice, nice.

I use the idea of returning to the river for our online spaces, right?

The river is constantly changing, but it's still there when you want to go to it.


SPEAKER_03:
I think another really interesting thing about this event and about events that have happened in the last few months is that we're really experimenting with sort of like pseudosynchronous forms.

So like in the sense that like we...

we are going to be sort of out of time with people and they might consume, as you're just saying, they might consume the live streams at a different point.

We might even reconsume our own content in planning for a future year.

But like even with the individual tracks and groups and the trying to keep track of what's going on in multiple channels in Keybase and multiple rooms in Jitsi, it's sort of clear that you can't possibly put your one stream of attention in everything that you're kind of interested in.

And so we kind of have to like plan from a sort of without this sort of synchrony maximalism.

We just have to assume that everything is potentially being consumed asynchronously.

And as a result, adapt some of the patterns that we would normally use to conduct an event.

And although it's experimental, I think it's a good idea to take these kinds of discussions and capture them.

And if people want to engage with them later, they can.

And if they don't, then we really haven't lost anything.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, I'm a fan of your word, pseudosynchrony.

Because there is, I mean, it was to the point, you know, there is something special about a live event or a real-time event.

And then it's like we record these things for posterity's sake and then are able to reference it down the line in the future.

Or if there was something particularly magical about some segment that came together, we can capture it like in a


SPEAKER_14:
time capsule, if you will, and, like, punt it down the road, create our own, like, rolling archive of things and find ways to... To build on what you were just saying about pseudosynchrony and kind of multitasking in new and different ways, I think part of what makes this event, I guess, manageable or particularly interesting is that other aspects of our lives are, like, already...

kind of thrown off balance.

So this isn't well, for me personally, this isn't like adding an event at the end of a work week.

It's like work is completely jumbled.

And then this is another thing that I now have time and space for because of

kind of the shifting around of all the different events.

So I hope that the attendees and other people see it as kind of a nice reprieve and a way to fill an asynchronous and kind of unpredictable schedule.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, that resonates with me a lot.

I mean, I've been managing a team that's been remote for a while and had already had some of these sort of pseudosynchronous properties before.

COVID hit, but I noticed with my clients and collaborators suddenly having to contend all at once with the sort of pseudo-synchronous nature of remote teams where you still do need synchronization around key points, around key ideas, around deliverables and sort of expectation management.

But at the same time, you've relaxed pretty much all of the other spatio-temporal constraints.

And I think that's really good because it means that people can really

you know, be the most productive version of themselves and without actually doing it by just working all the time.

And so there's something really nice about the way this ties back to the conversation when I first came on about education and sort of over-optimizing for subroutines.


SPEAKER_02:
And so to add to that in the innovation language, it is not a surprise because actually having constraints when done well works very effectively to bring innovation.

and creativity and that's because if you don't have any constraint in anything whether it's resources or bandwidth then it becomes very hard to know what you can do um hey how can we solve this problem well i don't know how much money we have i don't know well how long is the timeline i don't know we're just gonna keep going around and do i don't know things but if you say like guys

We got only three weeks, $1,500.

Sorry, that's all that you got.

And you gotta solve this big problem.

And you have only three people.

I'm like, oh my God, that seems so stressful.

But because of that constraint, it gives so much clarity on the deadline to aim.

to think about, okay, let's do a rapid-fire ideation of saying yes and to all these crazy ideas.

And because we know we have a deadline, we can now converge more thoughtfully instead of just saying divergent and ignoring when we can.

And so I tell folks that the reason why in an interesting way we're seeing more interest in creativity is because of this constraint we're put in.

People are forced to choose different ways because you cannot do what you're used to.

But if you actually understand how your brain processes that, that in itself is an absolutely insightful thing you can do in any future decision making.

So that way you can continue to actually put that scenario.

And so even in my case, I'm now needing to put new projects, new events, and we had to start with that.

I was like, hey, what's our deadline?

What's our constraint that we want to start with?

Because it's going to be a lot easier to navigate.

and actually honor and find clarity.

So just wanted to add that point that that's that's part of the innovation and creativity language.


SPEAKER_07:
Lou, do you have any thoughts on creativity or work in this context?

What's your headspace?


SPEAKER_11:
The creativity of work?


SPEAKER_07:
Or how was your headspace?


SPEAKER_11:
My headspace.

So like what Sasha was saying, this is like event is not at the end of my work week.

It's in the middle of my work week.

So I'm like undergoing rapid transition.

I just finished homeschool with two really little kids on Wednesday.

So I've been working weekends and like doing homeschool all week long.

So next week it'll all like shift.

But I'm like, you know, my headspace is overloaded.

I haven't had a day off like or time to even just stare at the wall for a little while and probably eight weeks.

So my headspace is overloaded and just running on pure adrenaline at this point.

But whatever.

I mean, I'm used to the to the work wave.


SPEAKER_07:
So, yeah, I guess the healthy follow up question then would be, do you want to return to how things used to be or what you think the other side of the transition will look like?


SPEAKER_11:
You know, I don't think that there is any sort of return to what things used to be like.

I don't think that that's possible.

I mean, I'm also things aren't that different for me, like in many people here.

Right.

Like I was already working at home, like we're working remotely and

know in this kind of especially like since the the pandemic like you we used to all work kind of eight to five ish right like you know i mean something like that we were all available through the day but now it's like i'm it's totally been asynchronous with my work team too because of my schedule so i'm like you know i'm just gonna do homeschool during the week because i'm running zoom calls and doing other stuff and i'll see you guys on mondays and fridays and that's it so it i mean it's just this kind of weird um

For me, I'm somebody that it hasn't changed too terribly much, but I saw some meme that captured it very well.

People sit in traffic for hours to get to a job that they need so that they can make their car payment.

And then they can make their house payment.

They go home to this house that they have to go to work to afford the house.

And it's like, you know, I don't live in that kind of paradigm.

And I don't think that people should.

Right.

Like, I don't think I don't believe in selling the future for a profit in the present at all.

Right.

Like, you know, live within your means and do it and live the life that you want.

Like a life.

I'm a lifestyler.

Like, JP, you know this.

I mean, you know, it's something like I would never move to a coast for a career like I'm never going to do that.

So I style my career around my life, not my life around my career.

I'm just one of those people.

So, but I mean, so I think I'm going to continue as normal, but I hope that more people kind of get off that rat race, like mentality and, you know, jump off and onto like the chill out bandwagon.

But then I worry, like, are all kinds of people going to move to New Mexico?

Then I won't like it here anymore.

I mean, I really do think about like the real estate cost and working remotely now, right?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I was going to say that, you know, I think that that's a really challenging transition to make.

So, you know, I, for one, you know, I did an academic track and really saw the rat, the rat wheel a little bit in first, the academic version of it, where I,

I was finishing my dissertation and looking at postdocs and teaching at the university that I finished my PhD at.

And then I jumped to industry thinking like, aha, I'm getting out of this.

And of course, I dealt with...

I worked for a CTO, I dealt with porn politics, I got paid very well, managed a team, I did research, but also was like, oh, so this is just a different one.

And then like eventually sort of like left that and started my own company.

And I've been doing that for a couple of years.

And I'm like, hey, look, it's a different one because now I have to deal with like

the sort of you know what I'll call like client management and funding politics on top of the sort of like maintaining a team and looking out for the well-being of my staff and although my staff is all remote I am essentially bearing the what I'll call the sort of overhead associated with providing them with a sort of stable environment even though they don't have to go into the office and get in the car or whatever it's really important to their headspace that

They can expect to get paid and they can do their job well and they don't have to worry about whether they're going to make their rent, etc.

And in any sort of scientific space, a degree of sort of, you know, not necessarily perfect certainty, but a degree of clear headspace where you're not worried about your sort of

you know, level one, or I don't know, like, just like the stuff that you need to just function and have your family function.

And I don't know that we necessarily are going to get a free pass to a scenario where people can just transition to not work, like being able to do this from home, etc.

And I think there's been some discussions even amongst this event about, you know, what about people who have inherently very physical jobs?

So like, you have to be there to do something.

And, you know, how does the economy change for people who are in the sort of

higher income brackets and have more white collar work also looks very different.

Broadly speaking, I think that there's a lot of opportunity for change, but I think that it's actually quite a complex phenomenon to look at the way the different segments of the economy can go through that transition to healthier, not just work-life balance, but healthier power dynamics between employer and employee,

And this is a lot going on here.

And I actually hope to see some of the projects actually sort of asking these kinds of questions and maybe providing some new insights.


SPEAKER_12:
We have 15 minutes left in the official proceedings.

And again, just that there's a few people still watching.

Maybe they've joined a team, maybe they haven't, as well as there's going to be people who are watching this live stream on replay.

So I just really wanted to convey that although 6 p.m.

is the end of the proceedings for the day and when we asked for everybody to have filled out the form,

It's not a harsh deadline.

We have people all over the world who are going to be joining teams while you're still sleeping if you're awake right now or vice versa for the other way.

And really the two driving goals to get every individual on a team and then to get the teams as far as we can get them over the weekend and beyond are still absolutely in effect.

So whatever stage you're at as an individual or as a team,

It's awesome.

We've made so much progress and there's still so much more to go in the weekend and so much more time to talk with our facilitators.

Monica, do you have any other thoughts related to that?


SPEAKER_02:
No, just to add, you know, have fun and wherever you are, that's where you are meant to be at the moment.

So don't feel like you have to rush things through.

If you need help at any point, whatever, no matter how random or small that is, just reach out to any one of us.

We will get sleep at some point, but you know, reach out and you know, somebody will be able to answer your question, so.


SPEAKER_12:
Cool.

So let's see if there's any... I think that really the mark that the teams are getting into working phase is that the traffic on a lot of the main channels slowed down significantly.

And so a lot of these channels, the last post is, okay, here's the team where we're going.

And then it's like the line goes dark because now the conversation is taking place outside of our...

controlled space ultimately and so it's really good to see it's one of those times just like when i asked you uh you know as they found a team to check out and i just watched the numbers on the live stream start to drop it's like yes more of you find teams and leave


SPEAKER_02:
Back at the team forming document that we were doing earlier, I'm seeing also new names and new forms showing up.

So it's great to see the tools being utilized.

And so all of those are still in the lab.


SPEAKER_16:
So go back any time to use what you need and to build on that.


SPEAKER_12:
And also just for those who are watching in replay and were wondering or worried if they had missed out on the ability to join into teams, just to restate, no, we're still open for team joining.

And on the Jamboard that's linked into the general, we also have a list of teams and people to contact.

for totally open teams ranging from related to education, high touch and high tech, increasing feelings of connectedness to combat isolation and other mental health, using data to identify effective public policies, COVID misinformation.

These are all questions that every background and perspective can contribute to.

And so if you're just listening through and you're not on a team yet, please, these teams on the Jamboard, they want to hear from you.


SPEAKER_13:
Any other thoughts in the last 10 minutes?


SPEAKER_07:
I want to hear from you, Daniel.

How are you feeling and what's your perspective on this?

And Sasha, I think she's right there too.

How are you guys seeing all this?

I mean, from my perspective, you're operating as an awesome command chair right there, where I see there's this interaction and there's so much going on down here.

What's going on on your end?

What's your perspective?


SPEAKER_14:
I think Daniel's been training for this event.


SPEAKER_11:
Sounds like it.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_14:
It's just, it was a long time in planning and I only saw a fraction of it.

So it's just really great to see the attendees come into this whole new platform and space and being able to navigate it and just kind of create these

you know, new Jitsi rooms and separate meetings.

Yeah, it's just, I'm really impressed and I'm just bopping around the teams and seeing how people are doing and just curious to see how people think about the situation.


SPEAKER_12:
I'm just happy to see other people get excited about complexity and bring so many of these concepts together into a virtuous spiral and a community that really values our highest vision.

working with JP and Sean as organizers and working with a lot of our facilitators who just from one email or from helping us in weekly meetings, they brought the memes to the front that we needed to hear.

And there were so many just subtle changes in how I thought about wording as well as combining A and M and Z and you put them in one sentence and it's like, where was that sentence?

How was I not able to connect the fact that if everybody thinks that the team is the unit of performance, then nobody is going to get trapped in this individual performance or anxiety because everybody's going to be almost persuaded that there's already something bigger that's happening than them.

Or for example,

That collective cognition means that individuals won't understand it.

It's just the neuron doesn't know what the brain is doing.

The ant doesn't know what the colony is doing.

And we know that about neurons and ants.

But then still there's this sense when collective cognition is happening in human groups, it's like, but I want to get it.

I want to understand the value add.

I want to feel what it feels like to have collective cognition.

And it's not for us to feel.

It's something that participates.


SPEAKER_16:
Live streaming is on.


SPEAKER_13:
So, yeah.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, I mean, I'm wondering if this is how a neuron feels like in a brain, because it feels like, I mean, I alluded to this earlier, but like there is still this like, from this seat anyway, there is this like interesting isolation, but I know that so much is going out back there or, you know, out there rather, not back there, but like, I just want to jump in and be a part of it.

So it's like, where's the,

It's the neuron that's like, I want to be a brain.


SPEAKER_12:
But imagine that approach to thinking about the brain.

Someone goes, okay, I think there's some stuff happening inside of the head.

Not sure where it happens.

And then it's like, take me to your leader.

Take me to the brain region that's doing this.

And it's just, that's centralized thinking.

That's take me to your leader thinking, and it doesn't exist.

So let's say you wanted to dive in.

What channel would you go to?

What Jitsi room?

Or what phone call did you move to?

None of them.

Because you'd find that it was through distributed cognition and all these avenues, which is not accessible by every person at once, just like not every neuron is touching all at once.

And so I feel like with a tree being a tree and the grass being the grass and the question asker asking the right questions,

question and then the group realizing that people with low levels of experience in a certain topic even on that topic can move the group ahead the most by making sure that the educational content is related to its target or that the stakeholders are brought in from the beginning those are things that that break out of sectors uh that break out of silos uh by default and so when we have this awesome community

of people who want to explore these questions and want to make it happen for these real problems.

It's just awesome, and I'm just happy to play a part.

Zargum?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, in a way, you're describing something, or you've worked all the way around the essence of the term complexity, right?

The idea that the

the whole is greater than the sum of its parts and that you can't simply segment it apart and look at the individual parts and reason about the whole and it's funny because this comes up in everything from the sort of collective cognition to even like you know engineered systems and physical systems like there isn't uh the thing i mean even in large-scale engineered systems someone you know sort of tries to talk about like an airplane say and like turns out the airplane doesn't really know that it's an airplane it's like

you have all these complex systems interacting all of the components but ultimately the low-level motor controllers and those sort of various other systems don't actually have any sort of understanding of the whole thing and that ultimately you know the closest thing to the airplane is the model of the airplane inside the navigation systems but even that is obviously not the airplane

And so, you know, it's sort of interesting to think about it from a biological, from a social, from a technical systems paradigm and actually kind of tease at that kind of gestalt that is complexity through these many different lenses.


SPEAKER_02:
And for me, what's really standing out more is it's really a real reflection of how life actually works.

And I think as somebody who had zero business background when I first got into entrepreneurship, having worked in government and nuclear weapons security and working in innovation and entrepreneurship, the number one thing that I was really kind of opening up my mind was just being reminded that

it things are always a lot more nuanced and complicated as all of you have shared in the complexity world and i think so often when we are students uh when we start working we're trained to kind of this is how you get your grade this is what it looks like to be the perfect student this is what it looks like to live your perfect life and the reality is that there's so many different versions of what it actually means if you know what best version means for you

And it has to start with you actually opening up your mindset, because if you have a very narrow vision of like what success or what's the right way of doing it, that's the only way and version you will probably see.

And you might completely be blindsided to recognize all the other options to even see there's a bigger whole sum that is right there to know where you can play a greater role into that.

And so that's kind of to yes and to everything that you have shared.

And hence why I think this weekend is going to continue to play that role for many individuals and even for me right now.

So thank you for sharing that.


SPEAKER_12:
Blue or Zargum or Sean.

Otherwise, just in these last few minutes, if you're finished, then thank you so much for coming on the live stream.

And you can just pop off.

That's it.


SPEAKER_11:
I'm good.


SPEAKER_12:
Thank you both for coming.

Awesome.

Cool.

So we'll just keep it running.

Nice.

Back to the core.

Wow, so Sean, you were for a couple of hours putting out fires or digging trenches or something.

What was going on?

Where were teams at?


SPEAKER_04:
There was a lot of activity, yeah, for sure.

There is a lot of people, I think, because we're bringing so many diverse perspectives together,

We need more time, really.

People are just starting to... There was a great project I was talking about, Project Seed, that was like, how do you define resiliency across cultures?

Could you look at almost wargaming that hospitals do about what if we lose power?

Is our system resilient or not?

And how can you look across one country's hospital system and the other one and see how they talk about resiliency in their literature that they write for themselves?

and come to some shared definition, which is really awesome.

But there's just so much to unpack there that it's just like, have an hour to like, OK, what are we doing?

What approach are we going to take?

That was kind of like that I noticed a lot.

And then, yeah, I just think there's definitely a lot of,

Like I wasn't in all the different explore channels, uh, so much, but it seems like almost all of them had some sort of spawning of a team or two, or like, you know, at least some activity or some pairs or, um, people are still registering.

So we've got to definitely nudge them to register.

But, uh, yeah, I think it's a pretty good yield.

I think the only thing we'll have to learn for next year is really.

How, if we're going to have a global event like this, like, how do you do a team formation process that doesn't exclude one hemisphere or the, you know, when people are sleeping, basically, because any point in time, you're gonna have one half sleeping.

So like, how do you spread it out so that you don't have this sense of people wake up and like, Oh, everyone's formed teams down.

Like what I dismiss, you know?


SPEAKER_12:
Well, to speak to the problem duration, it reminds me of the quote, I would have written a shorter letter, but I didn't have time.

And actually, the time is the time it takes to distill down to the basics, not just to throw out ideas, you know, just talk with each other.

so whether or two months or two years you would still be coming back to the basic questions about how our ontologies for example related to healthcare and how can we make global systems interconnected because it's beyond a lifetime's work for a community so it's beyond a weekend for a team that's why we're just beginning the projects now and we're putting so much emphasis on

the people staying connected.

And then, yes, we threw out some deadlines, like a 6 p.m.

today that was softer than some people thought it was.

But such is the game.

And I agree about how to include people from different hemispheres.

I hope if they're listening to this live stream, they know that the design of the conference was with everybody in mind and that the open teams are listed on the Jamboard, which is in general.

So many teams are still open.

And if you have a new idea for a totally different team, just make it happen and we'll help you.

We'll get more people on the team from also all time zones.

So everybody is still on board.

Every individual is still going to end up in a team.

Every team is still going to get the most help possible from our facilitators this weekend.

Fantastic.

JP, anything else?

Any final comments?

Otherwise, I think it could be time to have this epic four hour and almost four hour and 20 minute live stream.

I'm not going to lie.

It's worth it to continue for another two minutes.

But is there anything else that you guys want to cover?


SPEAKER_07:
Nothing that I haven't said in the past four hours and nearly 20 minutes.

I think it's just been an absolute whirlwind of a day.

Part of me is just that same thrill and high that you go into the thing going like, well, let's see what happens here.

And then it all comes together.

And it's just such an inspiring group of people to work with.

I mean, I'm very happy and very proud to be a part of this community.

So that's what it all comes down to.


SPEAKER_12:
Okay.

Cool.

Well, Sean, any last comments or can I end up the live stream?

One more comment.

Yes.

We're here.

Absolutely.

And we are here and we are here.

All right.

Thank you so much to everybody who's watching the live stream, who's a participant or somebody who's just watching.

If it's us in the future, who really knows, but there is a team for you and