SPEAKER_06:
Hello, everyone.

Welcome to the Complexity Weekend Closing Ceremony.

This is going to be a closing live stream.

We're going to recap and review what happened this weekend, hear from a bunch of teams, just the tip of the iceberg for the teams that formed, and we'll be talking about how we move forward together.

So in 15 minutes, we'll begin the live stream.

For now, we're going to hear 15 minutes of Michael Garfield music.

So stick around, see you in 15 minutes.


SPEAKER_04:
Help me!


UNKNOWN:
so so

so

Thank you.

Thank you.

All right.

Hello, everyone.

Welcome to the closing live stream.

This is the beginning of the end of the September 2022 Complexity Weekend cohort.


SPEAKER_06:
Wow slash what a time.

Carolina and Sean, greetings.

How goes it or where do you even want to begin?


SPEAKER_09:
I would love to hear Carolina's perspective as a first-time organizer.


SPEAKER_12:
Yeah, it's different.

It's...

Actually, being an organizer, I think, keeps you in the space more.

And I enjoyed it.

I ended up, I think, catching more sessions than ever before, chatting to more people than ever before.

There were so many interesting things happening.

A huge shout-out to the Ecotone session that I loved.

There was so much fun brainstorming around ideas for what complexity we can become in the future.

Yeah, just...

so much diversity and a lot of kind of like a rainforest in diversity of ideas bubbling around.

It was really fun.


SPEAKER_06:
Thank you, Carolina.

Sean?


SPEAKER_09:
I mean, it's always the best weekend of the year.

There's two of them.

We're just so lucky to get two best weekends.

Yeah, it's just super fun.

I mean, I love...

Honestly, this time, what was really fun and happens every time, but I really focused on this time is when you've been in a space for, I don't know, five hours, hour, six, hour, seven, or whatever.

And other people have been with you kind of on that journey.

There gets to be this really interesting moment for me.

It was at like 1 or 2 AM, but I don't know what time it was for anyone else, but it was just, we were all getting really deep and just really into things.

And it was just really like refreshing and nice to kind of connect with everyone.

Lots of people who are returning people and close friends now.

People who are brand new, they're awesome.

And it's just all of us, honestly, the best word is just vibing, right?

It's just like, ah, we love exploring all this.

This is so exciting.

Like, what are you going to bring up next?

And those moments are always really magical, kind of at the heart and the center toward the end of the weekend.

You just get to that sweet spot.

So that's one thing at least that came to mind.


SPEAKER_06:
nice yeah building on that i agree um this weekend was the first time that we had such a clear uh one facilitated session at a time so not splitting people across two and making a choice between facilitators and then almost always followed by flexible time and it feel it feels like for all the sessions that i was um joining for that there was a continuation of the discussion

with or without the facilitator afterwards and then for the next hour and then the same people were there starting for the next one and sometimes the facilitator would drop in and just be like oh there's a lot of shared context here and so that's definitely one thing i take away is that we're needing to have and share context with each other

And that can be really hard because again, some people are waking up, some are going to sleep and people are gonna have different familiarities with any field, any term, any thinker or podcast that's mentioned, it's going to be like a partial shared truth.

And just sharing a link is, it's not possible to do much more than just point at the context, but it's actually by just being in the space together,

And hearing some of the same discussions and participating across multiple intervals that we actually like start to have these reference points and callbacks.

So like one example of that for me was with seller session on the balance between immediacy and long term and how value plays into that.

there was a lot of reds that opened in that discussion.

And it was like, because what it was one of the first sessions I went to, it felt like every other session and even conversations that were happening when I was just walking around in real life, not in gather were being recontextualized by what,

happened in that presentation and Seller brought primarily questions and experience, not an answer to this challenge of balancing immediacy.

So just reflected on how like shared questions and time together can build context that allowed meaning to emerge.

And that's how we build CW.


SPEAKER_12:
Yeah, I think this time, this flexible time between sessions definitely really contributes to a more relaxed atmosphere and to people being able to just carry on the discussions and take them in any directions.

There's not that pressure to finish at the top of the hour.

Oh, my God, we have to rush.

There's someone waiting.

In the branding session, we just kept discussing.

And I heard of a session that...

had more than an hour discussion almost when I was asleep.

So I think it's great that it creates that openness in the space.

And I think that also that helps to a very nice ambience that is very welcoming.


SPEAKER_09:
I'm recalling another moment where it just kind of felt, and again, this is getting later in the night for me at least, but it just kind of felt like that scene in Willy Wonka where you're on the boat and then suddenly the lights are kind of changing.

and things aren't what they seem, and you're like, whoa.

And I remember, and distinctly, I think it started during your live session, Daniel, when the video feed starts changing as you're showing people how to live record, and then suddenly it's like everyone brought their costumes and started doing snap filters, and then everyone is just starting to melt it.

And then it carried on into like, I might not be recalling the order correctly, but I remember the questions focus session that Andrew and Sasha did where

where it's talking to computers or trying to decide who's a human or not.

And it just started descending into like, whoa, this is really interesting.

Yeah, the surprise element is always my, one of my favorite parts.

I agree.


SPEAKER_06:
my facilitated session was on video recordings and so we were building skill and hearing perspectives and bringing in complexity ideas and then you're right everyone started playing with their video and it was like the fourth or the fifth or the sixth wall was breaking it was like what is happening here so

Fun times, thank you both.

Let's look over to the Jamboard.

We're on Jamboard slide 17, and we're just going to have some recap of really what happened before we look at some artifacts and then hear from some of the teams.

So let's start with what we accomplished together.

So Sean, why don't you give a first pass?


SPEAKER_09:
Yeah, I mean, there's a lot of really cool things we've accomplished together, including a lot of artifacts that I definitely want to go over.

But at a high level, one of the most astounding things that kind of happens every weekend is just the sheer amount of content that gets shared.

Many of it is not recorded, right?

Our gather sessions that are interactive and live with lots of people kind of sharing things with each other and creating novel truth.

stuff, none of it really gets captured except in our hearts and documents and some artifacts that we share.

So it's just a tremendous amount of really interesting content, educational gold, really.

And then, of course, there's the teams that come out, which we'll talk about, and the kind of applied learning that happens when you unpack complexity into these specific situations in a diverse team setting.

And then the mentorship is always great.

And I love how bidirectional the mentorship is.

You know, anyone who kind of steps into that facilitator energy and helps another individual or team are often finding themselves being helped in it being just really interesting, you know, more than the sum of the parts kind of experience.

And then, you know, maybe Daniel would be going to talk about the pre-weekend events.

Yeah, talk about that a little bit.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, we had a fun and pretty calm pre-weekend.

We had a few different forms of events.

So I'm going to go over to our participant single source of truth and hear those who checked in before the weekend.

We always love onboarding people in the last moment.

but we believe that especially through deep time, the way to really make the most of the experience and connect with the cohort and start to find alignment and bring what you can bring to the cohort is through the pre-weekend events.

You show up with more context.

We had six kinds of pre-weekend events.

We had meet the community where we had some group discussions and some one-on-one discussions.

We had facilitation training with Monica Kang, our associate at Innovators Box.

And this was the first time this cohort that we had ever opened up the facilitation training to be for the whole cohort.

and that i think as mentioned a little bit earlier helped like decentralize the facilitation to being a practice and something we could all do for each other rather than being something that was a top-down force it it really emphasized that facilitation's a bottom-up force

We had tech office hours to make sure that people's audio and visuals were all right and that they understood how to use the features of the single source of truth and any other platforms that we used.

We had some awesome discussions in Welcome to Complexity, where we had people coming from all familiarities and backgrounds coming together, talking about complexity, different ideas, starting with some ideas and domains, and then moving towards how it could be applied.

And so it was great discussions.

Those ones always feel like they're way longer than one hour in a good way, because there's so much happening.

Sean led some purpose of Complexity Weekend sessions in the pre-weekend that also reared their head during the weekend.

So we can probably come to that later.

And then we had some sessions with Jessica building a lot on team formation at Complexity Weekend.

And the DOT Teams Committee will be sharing more later as a team itself soon.

But these sessions were meant to check in with participants, see where they were at with respect to team formation, and then help them see the pathway to starting their own team, joining extant teams and committees.

And we had a fun pre-weekend.


SPEAKER_09:
All right, we gotta see the artifacts.

Can you hop over to that?


SPEAKER_06:
I guess just one note, and I think it was just a few hours ago that Steven was raising some of these points.

We were talking about how teams are a unit where we can learn complexity by doing, but that's not the only scale of analysis.

So even though we are going to be heading towards teams in this closing ceremony,

Many ideas were shared around how can we ask people questions like how did Complexity Weekend experience enrich your life?

How are you thinking differently and acting differently in different personal or professional settings?

And using some sense-making approaches around that type of participatory inquiry because there's just no numbers around.

on what happens and whether we think about the mapping network weaving visualization that carolina shared in the opening live stream and the way that ideas are percolating across spaces that couldn't have happened except for this enabling event or whether we think about that kind of just like ineffable

value when we learn something and not just a fact about the world but something that's related to developing our perspective on our life slash complexity journey and so it's always funny because um we always bemoan as organizers like we don't have metrics on who's in gather or how many people are doing this or that at this time and um

it's almost like shining a flashlight into a cave or a dark city maybe because whatever we could measure is just like showing some quantitative gloss on something that would just, especially this cohort felt just really high quality and inclusive and really just like a developmental step for

I know our community of practice, but also just felt like other things were happening.

So that's kind of what I felt being accomplished together beyond any specific like number value.

But I think one way to look at that is through the artifacts, even though most of what happened was unrecorded in this same way.

So let's do some image meme review, shall we?

So Sean, our chief image meme interpretant.

I'll read the caption and you can provide the interpretation.

The top panel says people waking up at 6 a.m.

The bottom panel says people going to bed at 6 a.m.


SPEAKER_09:
Yes, I think this is just caught my eye as like a fun moment or idea in a global community practice like Obluxy Weekend.

where you literally have stuff going on 24 seven during the weekend and you have to sleep at some point.

And it's just funny when you get these time zone mismatches where somebody is really just at the latest of their night, you know, they're okay, I'm finally ready for bed.

It's like three, I have no feeling he had that situation quite a few times.

And then people are just waking up like having a beautiful morning, having a cup of coffee and just having that experience of just very different, yeah, architectures of mind, you know, depending on your particular time zone or day.

And having that mix into the diversity of interaction is one very fun aspect of complexity.


SPEAKER_06:
Nice.

Caroline, of course, just give any thoughts or I'll move to the next image memes.

All right.


SPEAKER_12:
I also think that that contributes to kind of a

to keeping the atmosphere alive because you don't have the whole cohort tuckered out at the same time.

There's always different energies to balance each other out.

And I think that's also keeps things nice in a way.


SPEAKER_06:
Yep.

All right.

Next image meme.

I believe we could say it's a person with a hose spraying them with water that they're holding of their own volition.

They showed up for that session.

Top says 10 minutes into complexity weekend session.

Bottom says Markov blankets.

I guess I'll take the first interpretant pass here.

This was perhaps generated along with many other incredible image memes during Matthew's session.

And Matthew's session was entitled The Emergent Metabolism of Soil.

And right off the bat,

It went into the Markov blanket formalism, which some of us know and love, others may know and love it eventually, but it's a statistical idea related to Bayesian graphs, Bayesian statistics that has

perhaps like few other or no other ideas, really catalyzed some amazing discussions around everything from map territory to the accessibility of formalisms in scientific ecosystems more broadly, to what does it mean to carve nature at the joints?

Are we carving the map at the joints, like where we just creased it?

Or are we carving the territory at the joint

in the way that somebody would talk about different kinds of things.

And Brian was in that discussion.

The chat was so active with different philosophy details and beginners asking questions.

And there is all of that being facilitated by Matthew.

bringing a lot of skill and expertise and connecting it back to the soil metabolism and the kind of work that he's involved in.

And so it just was funny.

And it summarized like a lot of the threads that we bring together when we're working together.


SPEAKER_09:
Also, I want to credit Squasha for the creation of this meme by request and instantly.

It was very quick and very impressive.


SPEAKER_06:
Yep.

She's quick on the meme draw.

All right, let's look at this one.

So it is a triangle.

And on the left side, it says CWE.

On the three points, it says generative storytelling, dialogue, challenge engagement, and listening for confirmation.

So what was happening here in whose session?


SPEAKER_09:
So this was Josh's session.

So if you go back to the program, just briefly show that row.

This was an artifact.

And in fact, one of the projects brought up to be

demos are figured out in this particular framework.

And, you know, that happens a lot of complexity weekend where complexity weekend itself is a system of study.

So, you know, one of our core values is that it is itself a complex system.

Our community practice is a complex system.

So it's always fun to apply the different tools and frameworks and kind of dog food it, so to say to our own experiences this weekend.

Um, and I don't remember the exact name of the type of triplet or triangle.

It is a triplet.

It is.

But my rough understanding is that the bottom node is something that comes somewhat easily or is kind of like a permaculture flow of natural work that you can tap into and maybe start to tweak or modify it in the way you'd like.

And the top node is where you're hoping to get to, kind of infinite game-generated storytelling, infinite learning, infinite complexity journey type stuff.

And then the node in the left is the way in which you might maybe go from the bottom to the top.

And I forget the exact term used, but it was a really great informative session.

And sometimes as an organizer, I wish I'm not doing too many things at the same time so I could pay a little more attention.

But this was a fantastic just artifact.

I think it's just really cool.


SPEAKER_06:
yeah all right well now we're gonna go to a few more kinds of artifacts and I just also think it's fun like this is the tip of the iceberg you would have screenshotted something different you would have seen something different you would have laughed at something different and uh this is just like a few of us reminiscing over what just happened but this is just a little bit of a flavor of what happens over the weekend all right here we have cat e kism

I'll take a first pass.

So this was a facilitated session that was with myself and with RJ Corday.

And we were describing and unpacking and interacting with a bunch of participants around this notion and idea and tool called a catechism, which you'd have to come to the session for the full story, but it comes from earlier operations orders for directing teams in a top-down way.

More recently, RJ and I have worked on it in the context of bottom-up emergent team sense-making.

And we've done this kind of session several times.

Every time it's resulted in really generative dialogue and in a team forming, which we'll hear more about.

And I just wanted to highlight that, especially through the contributions in synchronous and in chat of Michael and of Jana,

there was a sensitivity around what does the way that we discuss and describe our team process in what ways does that not just like kind of turn up or turn down the volume but make different outcomes possible or impossible

So it was a very important discussion around, for example, the kinds of priors that people might have about what catechisms are and about new ways of framing that.

So we were playing a lot with the term catechism and thinking of other ways to explore and describe, bringing in different knowledge traditions.

And I guess here's a cat undergoing a schism or something like that.


SPEAKER_09:
I believe this might be our new mascot.

It showed up in other Jamboards across the weekend.

Maybe it's our city cat that likes to go to all the different sessions.


SPEAKER_12:
Yeah, it did get mentioned.

Yeah, it got mentioned in the next branding one.

So that sounds like a good mascot to have.


SPEAKER_06:
That's funny.


SPEAKER_12:
Maybe instead of taking the dogs along with you, those you haven't gathered, you could get a custom one where you take this cat along with you.

We get a little avatar.


SPEAKER_06:
Nice.

And then I'll just expand these two.

Now we're in the Jamboardception phase.


SPEAKER_09:
There's plenty of Jamboards to be attributed to Complexity Weekend.

That's got to be a normal stat we have on the other slide.

How many Jamboards came out of it?


SPEAKER_06:
I'll make the first one.

This is from the rebranding of CW September 2022 session.

And this is a slide that is about co-imagining the Complexity Weekend space.

I'll just leave this one up because it's bigger.

And then Sean, go for it.


SPEAKER_09:
Yeah, sure.

I mean, just speaking to the other one real quick, Michaela led a really great session on an ongoing rebranding for Complexity Weekend that we're working on with the community and with the outreach committee.

And, you know, so if you want to get involved in that and couldn't make it to that session, just email ComplexityWeekend at gmail.com.

The process is really just getting into full gear.

And, you know, just that one was six slides full of post-its like that, right?

So it's a ton of great data that the community always provides when we expose them to any Jamboard, basically.

Um, and then the, uh, the other, uh, image is one definitely blow it up.

Cause this is, this was from, um, a session around, and I would call it kind of under the placemaking, uh, the placemaking, um, committee, which is really working on the online sense of place for our, you know, metaverse of tools that we glue together to make the complexity we can experience.

And these were just some ideas, amazing ones.

of how we might change, say, our gather space or the sets of tools that we, you know, glue together.

And it was a lot of, again, city inspiration, which is a fun aspect of the rebrand that we're exploring.

Yeah, Andy, maybe does everyone want to call out one that really excites them?


SPEAKER_12:
I'm going to call out the library because this was just something that we were hearing a lot throughout.

There was people really, even if they were joining for the first time, everyone was immediately aware of the richness of resources from all facilitators and all participants that were joining and everyone wanted for there to be a repository somewhere where you could just access anything if you weren't able to join a session, but you were really interested in the topic, you could still go and get it.

And a library was...

would be a way to to do that and there were different ideas around it and even having a curator someone like a librarian that would be around to help you so yeah this was something that I think came up here and it was all a need that was very heard from from participants this time


SPEAKER_06:
Awesome.

I think the takeaway from looking at this for the second time and raised it then too, was what we don't see here is complexity.

And we then talked about how

This is like a space that we, that can be evolving a song line for the 21st century venture, or it can be home.

There's family and kids and friends.

There's different professions.

There's an emphasis on interactivity and accessibility.

It's like, are we talking about Complexity Weekend, online community of practice, or are we talking about local environments that we wanna be able to

Modify and Scaffold.

That was a really deep and powerful point.

Go ahead, Sean.


SPEAKER_09:
I'm just going to pick one real quick.

I think the upper left, Accessible Hub with Portals into Many Worlds to Explore Together.

I think this is especially in the context of placemaking and gather development specifically for the Complexity Weekend community.

I just think it's this really promising and exciting vision of a metaverse where basically facilitators at Complexity Weekend

can open a portal to any world for you during their live session.

And the rules of physics, the laws of physics in that world could be different and they could be illustrative.

They could be a type of interaction, rule system that is meant to explore different ways of relating or ways complexity might be embodied

different systems.

And so I'm excited for the idea in the future for facilitators to not only get comfortable with our kind of default Gather.town live session space and get more comfortable and use it in the different aspects in different ways over time, but also to get comfortable creating their own worlds and allowing people to portal to them and back during the Complexity Weekend experience.

So that to me is really exciting.

And if you're interested in any of these ideas of how to

build kind of a complexity city in the sky, like a metaverse-laden platform or home for us online in our global community practice, then definitely email complexityweekend at gmail.com and just inquire about the placemaking committee and how to join our public team that works on that.


SPEAKER_06:
Great.

Great first beginning.

What fun.

Let's head into the next part of the closing live stream ceremony, which is going to be about teams.

And we're going to spend a good amount of time here hearing from some teams in different ways.

And then we're going to...

talk about what happens after cw so um for those who are listening there'll be a slight lag of a few seconds but if you're listening and you want to come on this live stream and prevent live uh present

life and you're ready to talk for up to around five or slightly more minutes and you want to share about your experience and you want to talk about your team and you want to bring visibility to something that you're working on or surface something that was really important for you if you're listening to this live stream and you have access to the gather space that we are in right now you are welcome to join and our bouncer squasha will uh welcome you in

so again why don't you minimize the presentation potentially and even just kind of briefly show the architecture well you don't know that what do you think oh sure um well um yes we're in the recording studio so there we are and uh here's bouncer squasha hello sasha um and uh people can come up

And we'll first prioritize the people who want to join and present live because maybe it's late or they're not available later.

And we'll have a few teams that have recorded videos already.

And...

Hey, Sasha, you can welcome anyone who is ready to present live to join.

So, yeah, we'll prioritize first the people who want to join and present live.

And then we'll do some teams with recorded videos as well as with just the request that we read their questions.

description out loud.

So every team will be heard from.

And even if you didn't fill out a team seed form, just come on up and we'll hear from you.

So it's all good.

Let's welcome Shirley up first.

How's that?

Thank you.

That sounds good.


SPEAKER_09:
And I just listed on the back end an ordering for the teams.

So after we do placemaking right now, we can then move into maybe teams and then Homer and just kind of follow left to right.

The host is here?


SPEAKER_06:
Yep.

What do you think?

Yeah, it's fine.

Welcome streamer D as well.

You're on a live stream.

You could mute the live stream, please.

Yeah, I'll just also note that if you are going to join the live stream, do make sure that you've muted YouTube because otherwise there'll be a feedback, which is complex.

Yes, Sean, I will be able to handle and make sure every team is heard from.

So let's begin with Shirley.

talking about Team Homer.

Is that okay, Shirley?

And you can share your screen as well, and I will center it.


SPEAKER_14:
Oh, okay.

Sorry, I thought there was one going before me.


SPEAKER_06:
Oh, we can do that.

We can do placemaking first.

Oh, okay.

Yes, go for it, Sean.


SPEAKER_09:
Sure.

Yeah, so we kind of already talked about a little bit of some of the ideas for like a future vision for this placemaking committee, right?

Or this internal CW team that's public facing and works on our sense of space online, our sense of place online, how we glue all the tools into kind of a unified metaverse where our CW ID allows us the key to kind of opening all these different areas to have experiences.

And so really, I just wanted to highlight the work that's already been done

by Shirley and Steven and many others in our place making committee to create the Gather Space everyone's enjoying this weekend with our cohort Gather Space.

In fact, the latest version, which we've just iterated.

And also the always online atrium where we have our monthly heartbeats and our public committee meetings.

And just wanted to kind of take a little time now

explore that idea a little bit and maybe see if anyone out there is excited to learn how to develop specifically gather spaces which is our main you know spatial video chat tool or synchronous connection tool um yeah so i think um it might be good i know surely you maybe had a couple slides you wanted to share um briefly i guess i could just say like some initiatives that we're setting up and so if you do end up joining the placemaking committee um

we're starting the process of actually splitting into two subcommittees, right?

It's all complex system or organizational dynamics, you know, is everything we're constantly managing.

And we found that when we're, we have the pressure of creating a gather space for monthly events and for a biannual weekend events, that the time pressure would usually force us into a linear mode of thinking and just kind of execution based.

you know, mode where we weren't really considering many different creative options.

And so we're deciding to actually split into two subcommittees where one of them is the one in charge of executing and publishing spaces in time for the deadlines of the events.

But then also another subcommittee to have no deadlines at all and be entirely creative and just build new worlds, you know, try out this particular feature and gather and build a whole room or space around the feature to explore.

And just out of that wild creativity,

the other subcommittee can kind of take the output and configure it together for a deadline.

So we're hoping that split in focus under these two subcommittees, you know, might help just a little more creativity and a little less linear thinking and more lateral kind of exploration.

So Shirley, I don't know if you want to share anything in the placemaking context, or we can take questions from Dan.


SPEAKER_13:
No, I'm good.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_06:
I guess it's a great direction.

So again, anyone who wants to get involved with any committee, placemaking being one of them, and we'll hear from a few others as well, they can email complexityweekend at gmail.com.

Oh, and we can welcome Stephen also to join.

I will try to request Stephen to join.

I have a feeling that Steven will know a thing or two about joining a live stream with no context.

So I actually eagerly await.


SPEAKER_09:
I think actually Steven might have a Gather experience to go over for the placemaking section.


SPEAKER_06:
Yes.

All right.

All right.

The bouncer has allowed movement.

Steven, feel free to join.

Just come up to the top and then you'll be on the live stream.

I mean, you are right now too.

All right.

Nice.


SPEAKER_09:
So just so people know who are watching, you know, we're in gather right now.

You're seeing Daniel's little avatar.

So this is all, you know, we'll do it live.

It's all fun, fun energy.


SPEAKER_06:
Complexity.

We'll do it live.

Isn't that the meme?

All right.

If Stephen does not join, maybe Carolina bump up a square or he'll navigate.

Okay.

Welcome, Stephen.

Hello.

Hello.

What would you like to add about placemaking or just share anything you'd like?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

Well, placemaking is a big area, right?

So you've got placemaking in the real world and placemaking in this world.

So I'm interested in it for myself, actually, because I'm doing – I was actually talking with the –

uh the canadian healthy um communities institute recently actually and they're doing a lot of interesting stuff around that people are interested in place making in the real in the in the sort of built world right and i think that i think it's a good idea to think about you know there's different practical ways that spaces might want to be used sometimes they're very

it's all about them being a bit different and maybe a bit experimental.

And there's other times about them being functional and focused and sort of well understood or familiar.

So I think there's been a kind of a move.

So I hear what has been said.

And I actually did a workshop recently with, and it inspired me to update a map that I created for Complexity Weekend on something called the Map of Meaningful Life.

um and um that that went well um and i i'm looking forward to actually being able to run another session with that now on gather um i can even share that with you if you don't like but i don't know if that's going to be of interest but um it will show you sort of the a slightly different way of approaching


SPEAKER_06:
i do that quickly yeah for one minute um is good just so that we can have five minutes per team and placemaking was also a little bit before you joined but share it for one minute and then facilitate a session coming up all right yeah exactly so this is this is the updated version of that space that was done in a workshop maybe i think about a year ago now a year quite a while ago but


SPEAKER_01:
Before, it was more the actual space that was based off the map that's used for the Map of Meaningful Life.

And this one, I've slightly adapted it to make it a bit more based on the experiences with some community members in Toronto, newcomers who were sort of exploring their community gardens on one of these maps physically out.

in the park with fabric on the ground.

I think this is going to be interesting to explore the flow of meaningful pathways between, you can see here, the expressing full potential,

we're kind of secreting our ideas to unity with others where we're absorbing them.

So this is, this is one of the ways where people can sort of it feels just a bit more organic now, in terms of where people are going to be standing and moving.

So that's something that I'm looking forward to being able to test out a bit more.


SPEAKER_09:
I love the embodied experience and gather and that being such a, an important part of being in our synchronous tool and space.


SPEAKER_06:
Absolutely.

Nice.

Thank you.

All right.

Thank you, Stephen.

That's it for placemaking committee.

We are going to next have Shirley with Homer and then streamer D if you want to just give a very short description of expressions of peace.

But next we'll go to Shirley with Homer.


SPEAKER_13:
Great.

Thank you very much.

Just going to share my screen.


SPEAKER_06:
All right.

It's shared.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_13:
Thank you.

So I'm actually sharing some information about a team that we formed at the November, 2021 Complexity Weekend.

So we seeded a team called Team HOMER, which is an acronym, but the name itself probably gives you a hint.

We are working on homelessness from a complexity standpoint.

And so our acronym,

entails homelessness, observations, models, experience, and research.

So what we're doing is we aim to, at this stage, use agent-based modeling, among other tools and complexity science concepts, as a tool to think with, that's ABM, and to explore and to collaborate together on one of the, I think, most complex challenges

facing, in particular, urban areas.

But homelessness, of course, affects communities around the world and in different types of communities.

That's our purpose.

And so we've created or worked on two ABMs to date.

Since we were seated last year,

And the latest model we have is called homeless encampment search.

So we've kind of, uh, started really with, I think, um, exploring how people who, who are homeless select locations to live unsheltered or temporarily live unsheltered.

So we have, um, our models are actually a net logo, which is very accessible.

I'm not a programmer myself and, uh,

Yeah, if I can do it, I think basically almost anyone can do it.

We've got our models, one model up at Modeling Commons, which is basically a repository for models in NetLogo that's very accessible.

And you can just find it there.

And also we have our GitHub repository where we have our code for our two models.

And so, you know, just a minute, I guess, talking about what we're trying to do is we're using basically, I think our approach is to add to, not replace obviously, but add to existing approaches to working on homelessness and to improve it in our communities.

Meaning we're looking at modeling,

behavior of agents and we're looking at how simple rules or rules can be encoded to an iterated over time agent behavior to produce different aggregate outcomes.

And so I think that what we've seen so far is, you know, some of the models, this one that I'm just mentioning, homeless encampment search,

was really looking at kind of simple search strategies for agents with limited sensing ability.

So, you know, a person in a big, huge city, but yet as it happens, we see people aggregating.

How do they know where to go?

They don't probably have a car or some limited mobility.

So it's limited mobility, limited resources.

And then,

works in that model looking at kind of dispersion and, or excuse me, attraction and repulsion mechanisms.

So anyway, it doesn't look very realistic.

So I think that's one of the things that I'm finding out so far is that that doesn't look realistic.

So perhaps we look at networks more closely because there's information that is propagating through, I think, these systems.

and another thing i'll just mention is thinking about i think i mentioned this during one of the workshops but when matthew was talking about emergence in soil or soil emergent properties i mentioned this amoeba actually sorry uh this is the same lecture but it was it's a experiment about ball bearings in oil and just showing like basic

kind of self-organization and self-repair characteristics for this experiment.

And so then I was thinking, and this is not what Matthew said, this is bringing in something else.

Wow, when you think about encampments as self-organized systems to some extent, what happens when you perturb those systems?

Actually, what we see is over time, they seem to kind of, again, aggregate.

So despite perturbations by external, in this case, authorities.

So that's just a few minutes about our project.


SPEAKER_06:
Thank you, Shirley.

Thanks for the awesome work and for showing how to stick across cohorts and be in the game.

Next, again, we're going to be prioritizing anyone, whether they have a Team Seed form filled out or not, who wants to join live.

And then we'll go to the teams that have a prerecorded video or description.

So next, for a few minutes, Streamer D, if you'd like to say anything, and then step off of the livestream area.

But please.


SPEAKER_07:
Hello, everyone.

My name is Tall Guy.

And I'm originally from Turkey, um, lived in Northern Germany for four years.

And then, um, it's been, uh, some, some journey, but at the end, um, found, found some stuff, maybe some, something good, um, that built itself and found itself quite naturally.

And I've, I discovered that like, didn't, um, really.

you know, intended first place.

It was all about giving every individual a capacity where they can find the most impact, you know, the context.

It started in different projects.

Etienne, as of December last year, started a project called Demoverse.

And then that created expressions of peace.

And it started on a Miro board.

And then now it's like a whole project.

um seems like yeah i gotta restart this and stuff like that but i would really appreciate if someone could um that can stream can open expressions of peace.org i can do it continue no no i will not be able to show the

second contract which we included citizenship info as well but the thing is uh first it started with hey um how can we um create a reversed reverse the doctrine like mutual assured destruction to mutual assured regeneration

and make it easy and empower states if they are in need for peacemaking and sort of untie a knot.

It starts with asking, hey, saying like start a world peace and express yourself.

and then asking this question how would you imagine express and make a world peace and create some focus around it and is if that's possible uh making it at the end um these two these uh to give a perspective and notion and which ends with the product which is a world peace and currently it's on blockchain and

It shouldn't really require technology in the first place.

But it's all about inclusion of people.

And then this is creating a peer-to-peer diplomacy paradigm.

And I don't know if to call that paradigm though.

So expressions of peace.

And if you would go a little bit down, just this part.

Introducing just a bit above.

Yeah, here.

Expressions and also next acknowledgements of peace gonna be the ways we experience peacemaking activities in a peer to peer fashion.

So to use this human rights we define.

hopefully going to be 31st one on the existing ones, which is treating everybody

equal and it's about peace by equality or peace through equality rather than strength or all the others which we know um then it will only generate uh armament races and that's gonna sustain so at the end we i want some process at the end being legitimized and when

when it's recognized by a first nation state in United Nations, then I will feel really good about it.

And some might be from those without arms at the end.

And so peaceful.

And I'm so dedicated around that.

It's an open source project.

And at the end, you can see how to contribute.

But there are like, hey, what and why and how.

And how is really, you know, that's a wicked problem.

I think when we include people, it's going to be something like accumulation of will and intentions and observability and undeniability, hopefully, and a challenge first to the countries governed by a democracy and some level up on that.

what I believe is we delegate peacemaking but at this part it might be that we get that back or inclusion and then it's peace by equality comes like that and the new human rights being that I just want to

just really want really bright minds in the world could focus on that much more and find ways of um you know like hey it's a small step for me and big step for humanity that should be an experience that everybody uh should be able to experience by just

doing the minimal thing and as um as people of most conflicted countries acknowledge peace for each other then i want them be rewarded most but um i don't know like a um i kept things quite raw and

it's gonna be much more simpler in the website and how things articulated but I want the best for the world that's why I'm looking for really people that really can give that it cannot be a

It cannot, I mean, that's the thing.

Its success is all about people.

And I'm wondering how much.

But there are also ethical parts.

I just want to say that and leave that to you.

Because that's what I want here is intentions come or precedes impressions in general.

like how things generally work.

But for that, I just want that inclusion of like almost 600, 700 million kids before age five is assumed as already expressed peace.

And actually, those haven't been born yet, but I will not go there.

But I just don't want that part to be questioning its legitimacy.

But hey.

make it stronger because people are looking to numbers, but I'm not so sure about it.

But inside me, I'm so... Thank you.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_06:
Okay.


SPEAKER_07:
Let's see.

Thank you for sharing it.


SPEAKER_06:
Thank you, Streamer D. See you very soon.

Farewell.

All right.

Next, we have Edwin.

Edwin, for a couple minutes, please share anything you'd like.


SPEAKER_08:
Test, test.

Can you hear me?

Sounds great.

All right, we're good to go.

I'm going to share my screen as I give a brief description of the Alchemist Club Studios, okay?

Excellent.

All right, here we go.

So what you're looking at here is our website, okay?

AlchemistClubStudios.com.

So in a brief description, the Alchemist Club Studios is an educational platform that is designed to immerse learners in developing deep understandings of STEM concepts, and that is science, technology, engineering, and mathematics.

Also ideas and fundamentals, fundamental principles by using a physical approach to computing and education.

One of the main goals of the Alchemist Club Studios is addressing the crisis of minorities underrepresented in the STEM field.

I will show you here some pictures.

This is the Alchemist Club in action at a fair in the New York State.

This is the children that go to the actual club in the New York Board of Education system.

And this is one of the projects that they worked on.

They built this hybrid model with IoT sensors.

And they were checking the measurements of the soil and being, I like to call them, citizen scientists.

Let me see.

If you can see on our website, you will also see a lot of the projects that we've done, like the Google AIY project, which is AI do it yourself.

I will share a link with this so once I create the team so everyone can kind of get familiar with the website.

We also have developed an innovative learning platform to help students develop a working understanding of bleeding-edge learning technologies such as virtual reality, augmented reality, mixed reality, Internet of Things, artificial intelligence, machine learning, and deep learning.

You're going to be able to see all that in the videos that we have put in the website.

And our first initiative focuses on using the Google Artificial Intelligence Yourself project as a voice and a vision kit to help learners understand machine learning, artificial intelligence, programming, deep learning, and the Internet of Things by constructing learning artifacts that are used to assess STEM content mastery, critical thinking skills, and academic self-efficiency.

And one of the main goals of the club is to take advantage of Google Classroom Educational Learning Platform, as well as Microsoft Learning Platforms, and as well as Discord, to develop professional development portals for educators to learn how to construct these projects, like the Google AI Do-It-Yourself, and to take it back to their classroom learning environments and enact on their curriculum.

We also focus on educational outreach using a global perspective.

Since every educator has access to Google Classroom, we have open learning portals so all educators all over the planet have access to how to enact this curriculum in their classrooms.

So the Alchemist Club Studios also developed an accompanying education toolkit, which allows K-12 students to learn basic as well as advanced STEM concepts and share their learning artifact using the Student Center Google Classroom platform.

Even if a school lacks the technological instruction resources, they can still participate in the project via the student learning portal on Google Classroom.

And this approach to teaching and learning is designed to prepare students for the digital world that is already here.

The program is currently enacted in the New York City Board of Education system.

It's a hands on inquiry based approach used to help learners to develop robust understanding of advanced concepts.

As I just mentioned, machine learning, deep learning, Internet of Things and so on and so forth.

And they have developed this working understanding by actually writing computer programs in Python, by learning how to use Google Classroom, Microsoft Teams, and all these cloud platforms, and create their own code, their own voice assistants, conversional AI using a physical computing approach to understand the natural language processing.

That's one of the projects that we've done, one of the initiatives.

We definitely have a lot more runway and a lot more path to explore.

And I could show you real quick.


SPEAKER_06:
Sure, just one more minute.

One more minute is great.


SPEAKER_08:
Of course.

This is our Discord where this is the portal that we have open for everyone.

If you want to get involved in programming languages, blockchain, Web3, machine learning, edgeware, computing, robotics, data analytics, cloud computing, you name it.

We will most likely be helping you find your way in this vast pool of knowledge.

And just so you have an idea, this is the actual classroom or I guess lab in the New York City Board of Education.

And yeah, that's pretty much it.

We'll be opening a team in Complexity.

If you guys want to find out more about it and want to join us, want to be an ally, everybody's welcome.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_06:
Edwin, Alchemist6, thank you for joining Complexity Weekend and this presentation.


SPEAKER_05:
It was a pleasure.


SPEAKER_06:
depression farewell all right excellent next we're going to be hearing from brad and from michael so if we could um get brad onto the stage and then michael can prepare um and be on deck all right do you want me to go down and tell brad

All right, Brad, you're on the live stream.

Please take a couple minutes and share what you'd like to share.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Yeah, I hadn't really intended to do a team until this morning, but I was really intrigued by the catechism discussion yesterday.

It was really kind of mind-blowing.

I mean, you guys did so much great work, and I'm curious about whether going through the catechism

creation process, like we have a new project and we need to answer all these questions, how often that needs to be done with large numbers of people.

And that was kind of my focus.

I've had recent experience with kind of rapid alignment tools that are basically just, you know, polls, but where the friction is reduced so that people can see the results while it's happening and people can add new candidates and people can vote up and down.

So you can say like, what are our principles?

And everybody can just throw in a word that's the principles they want to be included and other people are just kind of up, sort of like Reddit, but just in real time.

And I thought, and plus we have a structure that's called a decision tree, which is you can chain decisions together.

So like you have, you could have a package, which is your facilitators catechism.

And that's like five linked decisions.

And each one of those could be one of these aligned, these alignment, you know, polls where the whole community, however big it is, could actually be voting up,

you know, the best verbalization or the best writing of the situation.

Um, anyway, so that was, that's the idea I have.

We, we actually did a proof of concept with the emerge gathering in Austin, where we just, we did a bunch of questions.

One of them was, uh,

what are we calling what is emerging, right?

And people could submit any word they wanted and Superorganism won, actually.

It was like Holo Movement and Regenissance and all these great names.

But anyway, Superorganism was the winner.

So that's the idea.

Amazing.


SPEAKER_06:
Are you looking to get involved or how can they get in touch?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I mean, I think maybe, Daniel, I'll just have some dialogue with you about whether it's useful or not.

I'll show you the kind of tools I'm thinking about, and then we can see if something is worthwhile.


SPEAKER_06:
Excellent.

Well, thank you for taking this last-minute affordance to step up and share such an exciting direction.

Yeah, thanks.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.


SPEAKER_06:
Welcome, Michael.

Perfectly timed.

Feel free to go for it.

Share anything you would like for the next few minutes.


SPEAKER_11:
Hello, I'm just walking in.

Are you asking me or Brad?


SPEAKER_06:
You are on the live stream, and it is all yours, Michael.


SPEAKER_11:
Hello, everyone.

Hello.

I just wanted to... Well, I was waiting because I was kind of misaligned with what was going on where and when.

I filled out a team seed, and this is what and why.

So the why is...

is I've been working in a variety of different communities, similar to this one, self-organized team online.

And there's been a success in the kind of peer knowledge sharing and then less success in the moving out of discussion and into venturing.

And so I've been working for some time now

on attending to what is the process of coalescing from a collegial discussion into folks that want to work together on a venture and what is the process that they need to go through in order to move from a me as a venture to a we as a venture.

And so that's what this team sprout or seed was all about.

It's like some of these ideas are very much around the process of going from me to we.

and um and working through uh for for a self-interested team what are the things that we care about what are the learning edges of we what we as a group have and what is something that we wish to go on a learning journey together that creates an impact in the world so it's still very much open but it's structured in a way that's fairly uh disciplined

and pulling not only from learning methods and from the foremost focus is about emotional intelligence.

So there's a fair amount of pulling from positive psychology and social sciences, but it's still

kind of like framing a conversation, and what will happen in the conversation is yet to be uncovered.

So, yeah, that's it in a nutshell, as best I can describe.

Literally, I was not going to do this, and

I've seen it in enough places that I'm like, okay, this community here is smart, active, engaged, and fertile ground for kind of this co-venturing.

So let's just jump off the cliff and start flapping away.


SPEAKER_09:
Mike, I've got one question, which is with our monthly heartbeats that we do in this community, how might we interface

that you submitted and just support what you're planning to do.


SPEAKER_11:
Well, if, you know, one of the things that came up for me over the course of the weekend, I know Daniel from his work in active inference, and that for me has been an important, one of the sciences feeding how collective intelligence might emerge.

And I've been working for some time in the evidence of social transformation, and I brought up a paper over the weekend that was about

something that was produced a month ago now by the UN's Research Institute and some world thought leaders around a new class of indicators, transformational thresholds for social change.

And so doing a learning sprint.

In the active inference world, you could say that intelligence has a sensing side, a sense-making side, and then a responding side.

And so the sensing, we can sense through evidence.

We can sense through our organs.

We can sense through a variety of.

And it could very well be that it's like, OK, there's these new ways of sensing.

and then making sense of what is being sensed.

And that a little focused learning sprint around this new, exciting data and about how to work with it, how do different groups interpret it?

Because in some ways, this stuff has been evolved for thought leaders of the world's leading

institutions and it's like well is it useful for somebody doing work at a community level and so how do we extend its utility beyond the the thought leaders to practice leaders and your help in both um holding it up in the spotlight and saying okay let's let's take this from

from the blueprint into action and see who shows up and how they show up is deeply, deeply appreciated.

That's a long answer, but I hope it hit the mark.


SPEAKER_06:
Thank you, Michael.

Great.

Thank you for sharing.

Wow.

All right.

So we are next going to go, and if you want to stay on the live stream, Michael and Streamer D, you can like still be here or you can just step down.

It's all good.

So next we're going to hear from two CW committees.

We're going to hear from .teams committee, and then we're going to hear from .DAO.

So I'm just going to go first and quickly with .teams.

Dot Teams is a committee, which means that we are a CW team.

We're also a team that's learning and applying complexity.

And what we're learning and applying complexity about is about the team's formation process in general and specifically how it becomes implemented at Complexity Weekend, Heartbeats, and Weekend Cohorts.

so we have a really rich coda that's been developed by many participants including the invaluable contributions by jessica and others who have shown up for our meetings and contributed so much in the time between and

If you want to get involved with DOT Teams or any committee, email complexityweekend at gmail.com.

If you want to learn by doing, if you're interested or curious about Teams, if you feel like you have some insights or sense-making or affordances that you might be able to bring and improve our Teams process, any aspect of it, then please get involved.

And just in closing, I wanted to highlight a vision that we've had for DOT Teams.

which is seeing the committee as developing kind of like a continuous delivery service that gets iterated and versioned upon through the years, through deep time.

And so we think of different services that we could provide for our community of practice at CW, and also services that could be provided for the broader niche and network, and then different services

we will iterate on and develop so that they can be more functional and more accessible, more powerful time after time.

So just a few of those services which we imagine .teams might one day be able to be like the one-stop shop for include accruing feedback from stakeholders, being matched with facilitators and guides, finding a team for those who want to join a team, finding new participants for those who have started a team,

doing facilitated team Jamboard sessions, helping create catechisms or whatever they're called in the future and alignment and consensus, trainings around peer facilitation, as well as educational materials and courses for other stakeholders, modifying Wikipedia pages so that they interface better with teams and with Complexity Weekend, coordinating this

Amazing and fun and chaotic closing live stream presentation, helping with async contribution and asynchronous facilitation.

As for global teams, asynchronous contributions are sometimes the only mode.

and assisting in various other ways.

And we always have discussions.

We add more and more services.

We iterate on what we're doing.

So this has been a message from the DOT Teams committee.

And we hope that you get involved.

We don't have a regular meeting time for the next few weeks or so.

We're gonna be digesting a lot from this September weekend.

But if you email us, then for sure we'll include you in what time we do select for a regular meeting time.

And then we have a great time in DOT Teams.

That's all.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_09:
Nice.

I can chat about .DAO just briefly.

I don't think it'll be very long.

And maybe the format that would be fun is me just sharing a vision, because it's definitely stuff that we're not immediately working on.

And then maybe Carolina or Daniel, if you have questions, or Srimad, if you have questions, challenge it a little bit, because it is meant to be something that we really all have to spend a lot of time thinking about before we implement, and that is governance.

So, you know, we are a global community practice and the vision is to eventually have active participants be the ones who are governing this organization, who are managing the events, who are making executive decisions on behalf of the community.

And, you know, there's lots of ways to do that and an immediate way in which we are

are going to instantiate soon with the legal committee is incorporating and actually aiming to become a 501 nonprofit.

And so that is its own governance structure and is one that we believe is a good fit for this organization and will allow us to be able to fundraise in terms of tax deductible donations and all this great stuff.

But we need to figure out how to get the voice of active participants in the governance structure of that entity.

And in the future, what forms it might take in terms of, you know, the new kind of Web three affordances that are coming online and and how you might be able to, you know, say, as an example, you know, drop an entity and participants wallets for if they join a team or participate actively in the weekend.

And if you've

participated in three of the last four, then that might get you into opening the door to governance where you've experienced enough in the most recent historical window to guide the next iteration and step of the organization.

And how the mechanics of how to do that are things we definitely need to iron out.

One recent thought this weekend that participants had informed me of was new tooling around browser-based crypto wallets and maybe making it easier than we thought was possible at this time to just have your CW username unlock a wallet that's created for you to hold your NFTs that show you participated or even governance tokens potentially at some point as we learn those affordances and

model them with Block Science and other associates and come to an understanding as to the best solution we can deploy so that we can guide the ship collectively and ultimately end up with a global community of practice that can operate in deep time and stays relevant and keeps all the elements of the culture that we all love and enjoy and scales them and maintains them or grows them over time.

So that's kind of the ultimate vision.

Um, Carolina or Daniel, what are, there's a million questions.

What's maybe one question of, of how would this ever happen?


SPEAKER_06:
Carolina, if you want to go first, please.


SPEAKER_12:
Yeah.

One, one thing that, well, in essence in a DAO ends up being well encoded set of rules.

Um, and one of the kind of challenges I've seen thrown at them is that

they take away the sort of human relational elements of a community, that there is a possibility for that to be diminished through a DAO.

And I'll be honest, I don't have enough knowledge about this, which is why I'm wondering if you've had any discussions around this and if there's anything that you're doing to think about avoiding something like that.


SPEAKER_09:
Definitely.

A conversation that keeps coming up at this early stage is the human activity of managing an organization

Do you want to shrink that layer down and have more automated processes that once you decide to set up an election and the choices in the election, that those processes just take over without human intervention?

There's no counting the ballots and things that could be an issue there.

Or the other side, do you expand that human involvement?

Because ultimately, humans with checks and balances on each other's behavior is maybe the best way to govern.

So right now, the answer is either way or somewhere in the middle, right?

So absolutely no.

Real understanding yet, but hopefully we're getting closer every weekend.


SPEAKER_06:
Daniel?

Yep, I think just in the interest of getting all the teams, time will continue, but that's a very important area.

So people who are curious about Web 3, 4, 5 and beyond,

perhaps get in touch because we're gonna approach it from a complexity perspective.

We have amazing system modelers and people with insight in a lot of other areas.

So it should be like really a learning experience for everybody.

And it goes without saying, if you've listened this far, that it's a great way to contribute.

All right, so we have a few teams left.

If there's anyone else who wants to say anything at all live,

please come up to converse with Bouncer Alexandra down there.

Otherwise, we're going to do a few readings and then a prerecorded video, and then we'll go to the after CW and then the after after party.

Okay, so several teams have requested that their Team Seed forms be read live.

So I'm going to do that.

All right.

The first team that we're going to be reading live is Team Regeneration.

And the primary contact here is Killian Woods, who is a facilitator.

Their topics and focus are how to use regeneration to reach climate goals.

The next directions for that team are to explore diffusing knowledge on complexity to regenerate the world.

The team is open to new members, which is awesome, so thank you for noting that.

There are a few skills that they're looking for, people who have especially, and that's communication, education, climate science, and outreach.

If you get in contact with Killian Woods, that's the best way to be involved with this team at this point.

And so if you can't find Killian's contact information, do let us know.

There are several people in the team, Kareen and Eric.

How is the team integrating complexity into their approach?

The team is integrating people on the climate emergency.

And what kinds of impacts is the team looking to have?

They would like to impact the governments to make efficient policies to tackle climate change and biodiversity loss.

So if that's interesting to you, then Killian Woods, facilitator, is the key person to get in touch with.

Awesome.

I'm going to read a second team that also requested that they would be read.

Actually, that was Michael's team.

So I believe we can continue on because the project was mentioned by the team Cedar.

Also,

There are many other teams that did not complete a form or did not explicitly mention that they wanted to be read.

So I won't, just out of respect on this public livestream, mention those teams.


SPEAKER_09:
Daniel, I want to check if narrating dynamical aspects is one that wanted to be read, because I think I see it in notes.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, if they want it to be, it just, that team did not mention any details or fill out that form.

So I just didn't want to overstep, but yeah.

All right.

So there are two teams left, one recording and one, the team that is not a catechism, AKA cat speed run 2.0, which is kind of a fun thing

little reference for those who like the history of teams.

This is going to be a team that's going to be stewarded by a whole host of people, but centered around Complexity Weekend.

The topic and focus for the team is Interrogating Mysteries, Knowing Our Multiscale Selves Through Questions.

The team is open to new members.

The skills for this project and team are curiosity, love of learning, sensitivity, bravery, idea generation, and more.

And there are five next directions for this team.

One, conscious language and process around emotionally aware emergent team development.

Two, modular catechisms and novel formats.

Three, computational, e.g.

artificial intelligence influences on or with teams.

Four, tabletop role-playing catechisms.

Five, catechisms as digital journeys, games, or interactive stories.

And there was a whole host of people involved in this project.

It arose from a complex discussion.

in the weekend.

And the CW usernames of those who were in that discussion were RJ Corday, Dentropy, Doxology, Sasha, Karine H, Brian Vaughn, Carolina CC, Dr. Proton, Haptivist, Taika Metsa, and Sabine Colon.

Yes, Sean.


SPEAKER_09:
I just had a fun idea just based on point number three, where we were after the question session,

We were really just talking to a lot of chatbots and learning, you know, what it's like to converse and be influenced by these agents that you can construct.

And how fun would it be for the Catechism mascot to be the face of a Catechism asking bot to our teams so that it can, you know, be a little city cat, take the subway to its favorite spot in the city, come across some teams in complexity and

and ask some really great questions to really make sure the teams understand their assumptions.


SPEAKER_06:
Oh, this is awesome.

It makes me think about you're having a mission-centered discussion, and then the cat asks you about avenues of approach.

Or you're getting really technical with a lot of different approaches, and then the cat is like, hey, who's going to be influenced by these kinds of decisions?

For people who like programming AI cats, a catbot, I'm sure that you'll find a lot of directions with this team.

All right, well, I'm gonna next play the video of the team Ecotone Frogs.

So just give me one second to prepare this video.

And can you just give any thought for just, I just need one minute to prepare this.


SPEAKER_09:
Yeah, Carolina, I think just, you know, again, from the organizer perspective,

What was your take on the team formation process?

Kind of seeing behind the scenes a little more, like how it happens.

What's your feelings or thoughts or maybe even how it could be better?


SPEAKER_12:
I think I missed this process a little bit.

But I'm wondering maybe if a way to improve it a little bit would be to include in the

include some other alternative to Keybase as a direction just for people to, a more widely used form of communication and suggest people use that just as a, if they're wondering if they, maybe sometimes having too much openness can feel a little, a little bit of misdirection, people get a little bit lost.

And I think a team's fair is a great idea.

I think in previous weekends, I don't remember seeing one.

And this is definitely something where you can just gain visibility of everything that's there.

Just having the team, each team seed have its own page, I think was also a great idea because before there was a table, but just being able to edit your own page and keep improving on it on the weekend.

in this way, I think that was a really good idea.

And it's always interesting as just a final thought on seeing how this process gets iterated on over several weekends, just going to the organizer discussions and just seeing how this process has been evolving over time with onboarding teams, all of it is really fun to see.


SPEAKER_09:
Thank you so much for stepping up and any participant or facilitator, you know,

It's a core value in this community to step up and learn in new spheres.

Even if it's not becoming a formal facilitator for an event, but just stepping up in a moment to ask a voice to contribute to discussion who's quiet or maybe is not feeling like they can speak up.

You could be an organizer in the moment too.

You can notice something about the space that maybe isn't working as well as it could.

notify the event team or if you can't have the affordances taken upon yourself to fix it or, you know, socially spread awareness of it.

Yeah, you know, so there's formal and informal and all ways of stepping up are just like really valued and celebrated in this community.


SPEAKER_06:
Awesome.

I'm going to next play the Ecotone Frogs video.

Sean and Carolina, I do not think that you will hear this video, so just be aware of that, but I'll let you know when it ends.

Okay, so here we see Michael, Mikayla, and Sabine, and let's hear from them.


SPEAKER_10:
Hello, Sabine.

Hello, Michaela.

You two are launching this great group, Ecotone Frogs, and this is the introduction of what is meant and what the opportunity is for folks of my journey.

So, Sabine, can you tell us, what are ecotones and why should people care?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, an ecotone is a transition zone between two landscapes.

It's a place where the two meet.

Some species actually thrive in ecotones.

They have the ability to move from one to another.

But also ecotones are one of the most stressful and the most stimulating environments because in ecotones we have the opportunities of both landscapes and the tensions of both landscapes.

So you have to be daring when you are in a stress zone like this.

And we want to explore... And I'm answering the second question already.

So we want to explore ecotowns because it's a space for us to go on an adventure, to venture out there and discover what can emerge from it.


SPEAKER_10:
So, Mikaela, when you extended the invitation for folks to venture through looking at ecotowns, what was it that you were hoping might emerge?

And six months from now, what are you hoping might be the fruit of this co-learning together?


SPEAKER_03:
So the idea is to explore ecotones from all angles possible or that interest any members of our team.

Everybody's welcome to come with their questions and take on it, whether it be within ourselves and outside, between our communities, between disciplines and political boundaries.

See where the tensions arise and where opportunities are to build bridges instead of walls

and find commonality and the idea is to attend to this talk of ecotone for six months until the next complexity weekend by annual cohort and to come and report to you what we have explored together.


SPEAKER_10:
Excellent.

So studying the space of in-between and seeing what arises in these spaces in between, how should people get involved?

How should they sign up?


SPEAKER_03:
So maybe on the technical aspect, go to our CODA page, Ecotone Frogs, register, put down your email.

We will contact you through that means in the beginning.

And maybe, Sabine, you can have an inspiring discussion

visualization of how we want to do this by jumping into the pond.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, so frogs, I guess we did not explain that one.

Acotone frogs, because frogs are actually a species that thrive in acotones on the land and in the water.

and we ended in this ecotrans frog like a pond where all frogs get to sing their song and also sing the song together.

It's a place of understanding and we'd like you to join us.


SPEAKER_10:
Thank you.

So an invitation to a place of understanding sounds very exciting.

Thank you very much and look forward to seeing all of you on the journey.


SPEAKER_06:
All right.

Bravo, Team Ecotone Frogs.

It was a fun video, and I wish you the best on your amphibious journeys.

All right, well.

We are converging to the end.

That is largely it for the teams.

I love how we had this team Jamboard prepared.

We thought, oh, it'll be nine.

No, wait, it'll be 12.

No, wait, it's like 15.

So things are never stopping in their evolution here.


SPEAKER_09:
And that's not even the teams that are private or, you know, just the relationships and collaborations that might continue and spawn teams later.

So it's always,


SPEAKER_06:
fun to how little information we have yep um just on special request i want to add one follow-up note from expressions of peace and streamer d they wrote as an emerging right to introduce peace by equality being equally significant on acknowledging and sealing a world peace treaty we'd like to focus on perspective concepts notions and tools

that'd be using expressions and acknowledgements of peace to experience use this right so we'd build an account observable accumulation of global will and intentions empowering states to make peace thank you streamer d for sharing these notes all right well now we are after the team's section um this will be the this will be the last bit oh sorry just

will be the last bit of the stream um getting triple obs vision here so um what is going to happen next well one request that we are going to email you all about but we sincerely hope that you can come through and help us in this way is to go into the part after the weekends and please complete the feedback form

Every question on the feedback form is optional.

So if you think, oh, it's a long form, I just want to add something random at the end, that's awesome.

But please, completing this form is how we hear from our community.

Even if you didn't join Gather one time, it's incredibly important for us to understand what would have increased your participation and all these things.

There's also some other ways that you can stay in touch and involved after the weekend.

Let's look at those right now very quickly.

So first, Teams Beyond Complexity Weekend.

We just talked a lot about teams and we heard from a bunch of amazing teams.

Some of them were formed before the weekend.

Others were formed like literally during a session.

The level of commitment you bring to your teams, it's all up to you and your team.

It's all good as long as it's communicated and consensual.

Complexity Weekend has an annual calendar of events and a rhythm.

So we encourage that no matter how the team plays out, please come back, get involved with the community because you never know what you're going to find.

And we will continue to steward and scaffold these weekends and heartbeats so that your team can have visibility, so that you can always be bringing in new people and thus your team can thrive.

Teams are really encouraged to set up a regular time to stay connected.

And we talked about that a little more in the middle live stream.

What are some of the most immediate ways that you can stay involved in CW?

Well, the October 2022 Heartbeat is only about a month away.

So if you know somebody and you thought, oh, they just were a little bit late to register for the weekend and I think they would have really liked it, please, please, please invite them to join for the October Heartbeat.

And then they'll be included that way.

So it's going to be on October 29th, 20 to 24 UTC and October 30th at 12 to 16 UTC.

If you want to join, that's awesome.

If you want to facilitate, let us know.

Then we have a few asks.

And if you're listening along this late, please help us directly or indirectly in some way.

One thing that would be really helpful would be if we could have diverse and participatory organizers and facilitators who want to step up for these final three heartbeats of 2022 and play a bigger role in 2023.

Even if you don't know about organizing or facilitating and you just want to try it out or you want to learn more about it, we really encourage people who are active and can commit even one to a few hours once or every week.

to participate this way because we really do need more organizers.

So if you're curious about organizing,

Hopefully this has spoken to you because we want to co-organize with you and we want to work with you.

We want to integrate your insights into how we can make it better and reach out to different communities.

Organizers coordinate across a lot of different committees, but we have a great time doing it.

Carolina knows we laugh, we meme, and we actually help other people participate, which is the best reward.

Sean?


SPEAKER_09:
I think one big goal of Complexity Weekend is to have participants and facilitators and organizers with properties that are as flat as possible, meaning from every time zone, from every perspective, from every background.

And really the only way to get that level of diversity, which is really, I think, one of the main core values of our community, one of the big values people get by coming and engaging with the community is by people stepping up and being the representative of their perspective.

out of all these different things that influence our way of thinking.

So we really just need everyone to step up.

And that is what allows us.

Yeah, I can't say it in any other way.

It's just it's really, really important.


SPEAKER_06:
Complexity Weekend's a little different than a lot of other organizations.

Even though all organizations can be perhaps viewed as complex systems, we take that extremely seriously and we merge that with our values and our beliefs about participation.

So if you're curious to be involved and you see an opportunity or if you don't see an opportunity but you do want to be involved,

Things only happen when individuals decide to be involved, whether that's showing up for a session or whether you want to co-organize or you want to connect us with a friend who might want to co-organize.

These are all essential for the sustainability of Complexity Weekend.

So again, hope that people can find an opportunity to participate in a way that's really...

um organic for them and then lastly if you want to provide financial support that would be welcome the most important ways that you can support are to show up through word of mouth and through stepping up to facilitate and co-organize some people may also want to provide a fiat gift and so for those people here's a paypal address that sean can probably post in the youtube live chat

paypal.me slash complexityweekend.

These donations are pretty much vital.

We have limited costs, but we do want to be building towards financial sustainability and integrating all these kinds of things that could help the community be even more effective, like CW website, where we have an integrated chat platform and all these kinds of technological developments.

This is only going to be possible if we have modes of being financially sustainable, which just to be totally honest, we don't.

So if you even see a way to support directly or indirectly financially, we never want to have a financial barrier to participation.

So that means if you got something out of this weekend, then just...

you know visualize what that value was worth to you even if this is in a few weeks and then come back and support us so that other people can have that value too um that's actually it so these are the final thoughts um

Whoever would like to go first, they will have the privilege of not speaking last.


SPEAKER_04:
Carolina, please.


SPEAKER_12:
Yeah, no, I just want to say to anyone that might be watching as a participant and a little bit scared to step up as a facilitator or as an organizer, we've now experienced both.

They're all different.

And I think just...

go for it, as Michaela said in the first livestream.

It is a great community to be involved in and to experience in different ways.

I just really encourage anyone to just get more involved and experience different sides of Complexity Weekend, joining a team, co-facilitating a session if you're scared to do it alone, or stepping up to one of the committees or organizing.

Yeah.

Just a great community.

I've always had great fun here.


SPEAKER_06:
Thank you, Carolina, Sean penultimate.


SPEAKER_09:
Um, I'm just really appreciative to everyone who came and showed up.

I mean, I just think the interactions at complexity weekend are always so valuable and I always come away with a lot more information and exposure to a lot more perspectives.

Um, so I mean, short message is just thank you everyone.

participants, facilitators, organizers, supporters, associates, like everyone in the ecosystem.

This is always my favorite moment because this is when everyone's work kind of winds up and produces this kind of energy.

And then we get to enjoy the upcoming heartbeats and the buildup to the next weekend.

So yeah, just thank you everyone.

And I'm excited to see everyone in the after party.


SPEAKER_06:
The after party is going to be in the CW Atrium, which is just our public space where people can drop in.

It's where the heartbeats are.

please head over there if you want to connect for kind of parting words and exchange contact information.

Email us at complexityweekend at gmail.com if there's something that we can help with or you want to be more involved.

Otherwise, I just want to echo Sean's sentiment and of course, Carolina's as well.

Just thanks everybody who made it happen.

Participation means we make it happen.

So if you're listening this far too, this is Deep Cuts.

And it's been a great CW September 2022.

So peace out, everybody.

See you in the Patreon.

Bye.

See you next time.


SPEAKER_12:
Thank you, everyone.

See you soon.