SPEAKER_03:
Hello, everyone.

Welcome to the closing livestream for the April 2022 Complexity Weekend.

It's been an awesome weekend for those who are watching live and in replay.

We're going to have 25 minutes of some Michael Garfield music.

And then we're going to have our closing live stream ceremony, which is going to include a weekend recap.

And also some of the amazing teams are going to be sharing a little bit about their work and next directions.

So enjoy this music and see you in about 25 minutes to hear about some amazing teams and the weekend that we all had.

So see you soon.


SPEAKER_09:
Help me!


UNKNOWN:
Mm-hmm.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Okay.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_07:
Bye.


UNKNOWN:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_03:
all right welcome everyone to the closing live stream and hello sean and hello jen how goes it both just while i'm adjusting things how goes it oh wait sorry sorry sean yeah please start again go ahead


SPEAKER_06:
It was an epic weekend.

I'm still kind of in the chaos of it a little bit and trying to get the feedback form into the slides.

So you know how it goes.


SPEAKER_03:
How about you, Jen?


SPEAKER_04:
It's a good time, always.

I met some great people, had some amazing conversations, learned some very cool stuff.

It's a complexity weekend.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

So we will go through some closing slides.

and then highlight a few pieces of the PSSOT while those who are going to be presenting their teams can be getting ready.

So in a few minutes, we'll, after the slides, do the team presentations, and then we'll close with like a little bit of Jamboard and feedback and some next directions.

So first closing ceremony and next steps.

Do you wanna,

Describe what we accomplished together, Sean.


SPEAKER_06:
You take it.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.

Well, a lot of complexity happened.

There were many hours of time that was spent more complexly than could have been.

And that was of both the recorded type.

So we had the amazing facilitator intro videos, as well as the opening, middle and closing live streams, which are recorded and rewatchable.

And then there's the unrecorded times that we had together.

And that was about 40 facilitated sessions.

Then there was the teaming and office hours.

And then all the connections amongst the participants on the edges, which are how many hours can be counted there.

So a lot happened synchronously as well as asynchronously, people using Keybase and sending messages, starting channels and teams.

We had pre-weekend events to help build familiarity with people, the tools, and the ideas of Complexity Weekend.

And

Although the team's process is always an evolution, and we'll definitely be talking more about it, we had a seed and a sprouting form, and we had a bunch of both of them.

So we'll look more at them soon.

But there was a bunch of both team seed and sprouts.

And yeah, altogether, there was about 100 plus registered participants, although some may have participated only a little bit synchronously, and then about 30 facilitators, and so it was an awesome time.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I just want to shout out the complex weekend teams committee for all the work leading up to this weekend and just the team seeding sprouting format.

I just think our team's process was much more mature and it keeps getting mature every cohort.

So it was just really awesome to witness.

So thanks to Jessica and just everyone on that committee.


SPEAKER_03:
Jen, anything else there?

Okay.


SPEAKER_04:
Participants, everybody, whether you're facilitating or participating for being here with us.


SPEAKER_06:
Yep, you make the event.

I mean, that's really what, it's the novel information we create while interacting throughout the whole weekend and the pre-weekend that makes it such a special time.

And I've heard from several participants that were new, this was their first Complexity Weekend, and they were just talking about how special the people are that they've met and the community.

And I couldn't agree more.

I think it's remarkable what we've got going here.


SPEAKER_03:
Great.

So to just recap our,

cohort was was global.

And so that's why we planned for the continuous facilitated sessions alternating with the teaming and office hour because there's no such thing as a good time for every person in the

So we had a continuous experience and there was ebb and flow with how many were synchronously around.

But we know that we put out a program that anyone in any time zone with any time availability would have been able to find something synchronously and asynchronously.

So just providing the most possible opportunities to different kinds of participation.

And participants came in with just total all over the map from how familiar they were with learning and with applying complexity.

So any thoughts on that?


SPEAKER_06:
I think one thought that's fun, I think a lot of people's first time doing a Flexity Weekend, or people watching this and kind of wondering what this event is all about, it's really fun just to see the 24-7 kind of nature of the weekend.

And I know for me, every weekend, we talk about making sure you have a balanced approach.

eating and sleeping but i always tend to uh to stay up a little too late it's just hard to step away there's like you know i'll be ready getting ready for bed and then and then some people will pop in from a new time zone and i just i want to figure out you know what they're all about and what their experiences are so it's kind of it's just a very fun novel experience i'm just really grateful to having uh experienced that with everyone here jen anything to add there i you know just love the flow uh


SPEAKER_04:
I was constantly meeting different people.

My times kind of maybe stay the same, but I'm meeting people from different parts of the globe as they're starting their day, ending their day.

So it was really fantastic.


SPEAKER_03:
Awesome.

So what happens now?

So after this live stream, we are in the period between the April and the September 22 weekends.

During that period, we'll talk a little bit more about it, but there's going to be a few heartbeats, one, two, three, four, or five heartbeats.

And then there's going to be you and your team.

So whatever that rhythm looks like for you and the relationships and the groups that you formed coming out of the weekend, that's when the actual rhythm of that process, the yellow line, is going to be happening.

And then there will be these heartbeats, which we're also going to be evolving and iterating on, which maybe we'll talk about later in the stream.

And every single one of the heartbeats and the weekends are a total participatory co-organizing team.

and are just the facilitators who commit to that event.

So we'll talk more also about the facilitator and the organizer RSVP.

If you see that you might want to contribute a skill or some capacity, and we'll even talk about what those are.

And just to remind that the biggest circle across all of these events is the participants.

So everyone is welcome to just come to Heartbeats and Weekends again and again as a participant.

And also we welcome anyone who would like to co-organize or facilitate at a weekend or a heartbeat.

individuals or organizations that might be interested in being an associate or supporter to help make cw sustainable through time and of course just being on teams and whether they're cw committees or the teams outside of cw these are like all ways to be in the ecosystem and be in the game and be part of something that's really positive anything you'd like to add on those last two


SPEAKER_06:
Well, I think one thing I'll add is kind of an improvement to the slide, actually, because I remember for a while we didn't have the orange dots.

And we're going to hear from a couple of the committees as teams that were present at this cohort and active.

And it's just a really great opportunity when you hear about these committees.

If you want to get involved,

in learning how to apply complexity, learn complexity by doing.

Committees are a really great opportunity because they're kind of a standing team that's a deep time team that's serving to produce different functions for the Complexity Weekend community.

And it's super easy to drop in and out of those committees and learn in that diverse team setting without being responsible for starting something or maintaining it or

All that goes on in the gray bubbles there, the teams, to keep it functioning and running in deep time.

There will be people that already kind of have scaffold the team or keep scaffolding it, and it's just a nice drop-in opportunity.

So I just want to kind of highlight that from this slide.


SPEAKER_03:
Nice.

Jen, anything?

Carry on.

Cool.

How do teams continue?

Like we're about to hear in just a few minutes, so maybe Sean, if you can be messaging some people or coordinating, but in just a few minutes, we're gonna hear from a few of the teams that have formed or developed during this weekend and what happens with the teams that present, what happens with the teams that didn't present for one reason or another, but they're still gonna be continuing on.

The level of commitment in your team, the direction and the velocity and the acceleration, all the coordinates of motion are degrees of freedom for your team.

So whatever is working in everyone's life is the right outcome for that team.

CW provides a rhythm in the background for your team, for example, to reconnect at heartbeats or to take another kind of exciting momentum gathering period during the weekend, maybe even having some new participants join in.

And one of the best ways that teams can just keep working towards their goals, even if that first goal is just finding alignment or like finding what deliverable or direction they want to go in,

One of the best ways to make that happen is to have a recurring meeting time and try to be committed to that or adjusting it.

And it can be different rhythms like monthly or weekly, but just some type of rhythm that builds a structure that there can be an emergence and interactions within.

A lot of teams have found that to be really important.

What would you add about that, Sean?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I think, you know, teams are, every team is different.

And some teams formed during this weekend with the sole intention of just being around for this weekend to learn, you know, to learn complexity by doing in this, you know, people have commitments outside of this community.

And that was kind of the extent to which they wanted to stay collaborating.

Some teams

Part of the subset of the team had that mentality.

It was going to be around for the weekend and learning and then they're going to leave and the rest of the team, some subset might want to continue on or some are really dedicated and they're they know that they're going to be the starting of a company or the starting of a long term academic collaboration or partnership.

And the types of outcomes that these teams are going for all across the map.

Right.

That could be trying to get grants together, trying to write papers together.

trying to build a business trying to start a vlog you know it's like all over the map so it's it's just like facilitators at complexity weekend and participation modes of complexity weekend um we shouldn't try to box any definition you know of what teams are facilitators or participants are teams are are very diverse and dynamic and um embrace that about the teams that you're in uh as a fun as a product of this weekend and the teams outside of uh complexity weekend it's it's

There's one thing to take away from this whole experience.

It's learning about how teams and people in relationships are complex phenomena and how to kind of apply all the different perspectives you've seen on complexity to your social relations and beyond.

Thank you, Sean.


SPEAKER_03:
Here's a few next steps to take on how to stay involved.

So the next event is going to be the May 2022 Heartbeat.

There's gonna be two intervals of four hours at this Heartbeat, and they're gonna be May 28th at 20 UTC,

and May 29th at 12 UTC.

And there's going to be a lot that you can do by being a participant at this Heartbeat.

You can reconnect with a cohort and other cohorts.

You can hear and provide project updates.

And you'll be able to connect with new participants who are coming to a Heartbeat.

Maybe people you invite and say, hey, I had a really great experience at this weekend.

So come check out this Heartbeat event.

There's no asynchronous component.

There's no financial barrier.

So the idea of a heartbeat is just a space where a returning participant and a new participant will also feel like this is an event that is for them.

And these two intervals, they rotate every month.

So it just is rotating so that there's different time zone accessibility.

And the other way that you can stay involved in the rest of 2022 is by registering as a facilitator or an organizer for any of these upcoming events.

And so the link that I've shared in the YouTube chat brings you to

a coda where you can step up to organize or facilitate and these are drop downs where you can learn more about the facilitator commitment at the heartbeat and at the weekend and where you can learn about the organizer commitment at the heartbeat and at the weekend

And then there's a form right here where you just provide your name and information, what role you're interested in, organizer or facilitator, and then which of the following events that you'd like to be that role for.

So do it again if you want to be both roles, but this is intended to be so that somebody could really hone their facilitation and be building something like over the months

through the repeat facilitation or organization at CW and just any comments or questions.

And then when the time is right, we'll assemble the team of co-organizers at the beginning of the month for the heartbeat or a little before, and then about four months before the weekend.

And then the team of co-organizers are who assemble the team of facilitators and start reaching out to participants.

So even if you're not sure what this entails, but you think like potentially you might have

maybe four one-hour intervals during a month to come to heartbeat co-organizer intervals or want to do any kind of improvement or feedback or iterating.

These are like really important opportunities as well as perhaps getting involved in any of the committees.

So Sean or Jen, what would you say to that?


SPEAKER_04:
I would say this is one of those be the change you want to see in the world type of moments and

Since we're all, this is volunteer run and a pretty small crew of people that are involved.

So anything you want to do to contribute is going to have a big impact.

So I think this is not something where we get, I don't think we get bogged down into the rules of order and meetings or anything like that.

We're small and we're nimble.

and um and we're always iteratively changing too so changes do get incorporated and and if there's something that you are particularly passionate about or you think that really could be done better this is a chance to really make that a big impact on this event and uh and see what effects you have in the world and i'll just add on top of that too um


SPEAKER_06:
You know, I think people, um, sometimes aren't, aren't aware of the fact that we're completely volunteer run organization and that we're completely, um, uh, decentralized, completely decentralized, but, um, aiming to get there over time.

and really bottoms up in our approach of organizing.

And so getting involved in being an organizer, being a facilitator in the committees, it's essential to keeping this magic alive and sustained through deep time and growing and getting better over time and being more inclusive and all these things that are important to us.

So it won't just happen on its own.


SPEAKER_03:
it really does require people who this resonates with to get involved and and be active um in being the change you want to see in the world great book awesome okay let's return to the slides so um we have just as a reminder uh our purpose and values and guidelines sean what do you want to share here or shall we just

move to the feedback.


SPEAKER_06:
Well, let's go, let's do these a little bit.

It's always good to kind of rehash the values.

And again, uh, like most things in this complex adaptive system that is complexity, we can, it is also evolving.

So this snapshot in time of purpose, uh, values, guidelines, um, the thing that's resonating with me in this moment changes moment to moment.

It's always fun to just see what calls out to me.

Um, it's that we include to innovate.

And I think, um,

One of the reasons I think people like to join Complexity Weekend is we're talking about problems that have often been around for a long time, but we still haven't solved them, right?

And in a lot of ways, I think the only way we're going to make

uh huge progress with some of these problems um is to do something that probably hasn't been done much up to this point which is try to get every perspective that matters on that problem together at a table and that could be across time zone across country across discipline perspective with this kind of complexity thinking mindset and having us all you know have our values of being respectful and and

And having the form of innovation you get when you do that well, when you do embrace diversity and are able to integrate very, very different perspectives on a problem, I think that's an approach that really hasn't been tried enough.

And maybe we'll be able to make a lot more headway on these difficult problems of our society if we do that more.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you, Sean.

We'll go to values.

Jen or Sean, if you'd like, or I'll pick one, but just what's one of the values here that maybe you thought about differently over what happened this weekend or through organizing this weekend?


SPEAKER_04:
Well, to build on what Sean was just saying, this participation means accessibility and inclusion for all.

I know we kind of keep on going back to the inclusion point, but I think it's, I mean, it's absolutely key.

And so how do we,

remove obstacles to participation, I think is something that we've all been thinking about.

I know I've already gotten a bunch of feedback from people on what did work and what hasn't worked.

And those will get folded into future events.

So I think it's like, how do we just keep on getting that participation vibe

you know, expanding it and getting it stronger and stronger.

Because I think we just get to better solutions and, you know, more insights through that.

And so that's, I think, an area where I'll be continuing to focus as an organizer moving forward.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you.

Sean, do you want to add anything?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I think one that's kind of calling out to me from this particular weekend experience is respect is key.

And I think something I hear a lot from participants is that this community is so warm and welcoming and inviting and respectful.

You're almost never going to experience interacting with somebody and being like shut down or

or feeling like your perspective is invalid.

Everyone listens to each other in this community and they may push back against your ideas or they may challenge you, which is great, but they're not going to just completely nullify your perspective.

And that's really a beautiful thing and is what allows us... I'll say a short story that I thought was really funny.

Tybo, one of our facilitators of this cohort, she was talking about doing a session on

greenhouse gas emissions and had a Jamboard slide where she was saying, okay, we're gonna look at all the different greenhouse gas emissions that are caused by our various fields and let's figure out how our fields are contributing and how we, let's brainstorm some solutions.

And she wasn't expecting even a little bit of pushback on that premise.

There's really every mindset or philosophy present in complexity again.

She stumbled a little bit.

She's like, oh, okay, I got to step back a little bit.

Let's first talk about what is the observable problem.

I just thought that was a funny moment.


SPEAKER_03:
And also when we checked in for that middle live stream and this was just, or at least the template or the field was just lying there for the hapless live streamers to discover.

And then that's like the emergence where we have just different minds and perspectives in the moment collaborating and also open that up to asynchronous

participation.

So yeah, that was definitely very fun.


SPEAKER_06:
I was talking to Tygo.

And we went and revisited her cycles.

We were just like getting feedback, you know, on her how her live session went.

And she saw it was populated.

What happened?

And I was just like, well, that's, that's just kind of what happens here.

You know, we talked like to talk about stigma G as a concept in complex systems, you know, where

we might interact through our environment, right?

So Taiwo created a slide and left it and walked away, and another ant came by and moved the piles, you know?

It brought a lot of joy to our eyes, which I thought was really fun.


SPEAKER_03:
Awesome.

So also, we'll just go to the participation guidelines, and then we're going to bring it back to feedback.

So what, if any of you two would like, what's one of the participation guidelines that, like,

Impresses on you here at the end of the synchronous components of the weekend.


SPEAKER_04:
I Always think the adopting a complexity thinking mindset You know some of us have been you know immersed in parts of the more formalized academic parts of the complexity thinking world, but that's not even a

all of the complexity thinking world that's out there.

And so we can kind of bounce off each other and refine our mindsets as well, but just kind of getting into it and not getting away from reductive thinking and getting into the connections and the network effects and the emergent behavior.

When we spend so much time, we're like working on just kind of the, you know,

kind of reductive processes many times in the rest of our lives.

So I always like the kind of a diving into the always, you know, I'm talking to somebody and they're working on copyrights of guitar riffs and like, how can we, you know, kind of, you know, synthesize something together.


SPEAKER_03:
just even in a conversation uh that is something more than just kind of our individual pieces of what we bring to that conversation comes out of it thank you and i think a great way that somebody's participation can be like even more than their participation is by providing their feedback so here's one link which sean you can paste in but also nrp ssot if you go down to the bottom after the weekend

you'll find the feedback form right here.

So it would be incredibly helpful and totally requested no matter how much you participated in any way to complete this feedback form.

And also if you want, just like there is on the public CODA site, where there's the step up to organize or facilitate form, also in the PSSOT, you'll find that form.

But the really important form for everybody to fill out would be the feedback form.

So any role, anyone who was at all in the cohort, especially if you didn't participate actively, because we want to learn about that and we want to learn about how to engage your participation better in the future.

So that would be really requested and important for people to complete the feedback form.

Sean?


SPEAKER_06:
I think, yeah, I just want to stress that we improve pretty much every time we do this event.

And the only way that happens is by getting feedback.

So if any part of the experience was not optimal, if it felt like there were too many tools, you had certain interactions that just didn't

could have been better, could have been framed better, the space could have helped, the sense of global place for our CUNY practice could have been better.

Anything you could think of, we need to hear it because if we don't have that information, we're not able to work off of it.

And we really do take it seriously.

And the organizers, we all have a feed of feedback that whenever it comes in, we drop it in this feed and we'll revisit it at the top of

The process it's every six months we do one of these and every month we do a heartbeat and it's the feedback Integration is pretty much constant.

So you're spending a couple of minutes to do this is a Nonlinear outsized effect, right?

You do a little thing here and it's actually going to have a very outsized positive impact


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks, so we're going to close this section of the stream with some role-based acknowledgements, and then we're gonna follow that with the Teams presentations.

We don't know how many are gonna come, and it's only gonna be a subset of the registered ones, but Sean, if you could start lining up the teams to present.

So if you're listening live, even if you didn't fill out any form,

whatever, we're ready within reason for you to join this live stream and give a public recorded and archived presentation of anything you want to share.

It can be even remarks on your personal direction.

So if you're listening to this and not all of you are, then you're welcome to join this.


SPEAKER_06:
I want to share one thing just for people watching.

If you can actually drop the slides and show Gather, I think it's fun to show people that we're literally live streaming from Gather right now, our cohort Gather space that the placemaking committee has built.

And there's coworking spaces all around us.

People are in their coworking spaces.

And I'm literally going to, like, a Conway's Game of Life glider, I'm going to run around the space grabbing them and bringing them up to record.

So it's just a funny thing.


SPEAKER_03:
thing that you experience when you're in complexity weekend yeah and it helps slide people on and off the stream it's going to be awesome and um it's fun okay so quickly the role-based acknowledgements and then we'll go to the teams there were five organizers so thanks a lot to sean jen sarah sid and myself we had a good

time organizing.

Everyone contributed in essential ways and like everyone's touch is on the event and everybody gave incredible primary contributions and feedback.

So we made it happen as organizers and that's a successful colony.


SPEAKER_06:
Before we move on, I want to ask Jen, because the first time organizing, what was it like for people who might want to think about stepping up and organizing?


SPEAKER_04:
You know,

I was really worried that it was going to be overwhelming and that I wouldn't be able to, that I was going to spend all my time just trying to get my feet underneath me, that I wouldn't be able to really make that much of a contribution.

But I mean, you know, so I'm a longtime facilitator, so I'm familiar with the Complexity Weekend system.

But it was actually really easy to to slide in I'm on one of the committee's and it's a topic that I'm not super familiar with and then just the event organizing You know, so it's you know able to develop some skills in one area and I think also make important impacts over in that committee and Then for this, you know, I think we've had some really great deep conversations that have been Implemented into real changes in the event and

And that it was not a crushing amount of work.

Yeah, I know I'm always grousing about what time during the day the meetings are, but that is what it is.

That's not such a big deal.

I don't think that's a barrier since it's only one hour out of the week for that synchronous work together.

And then pick whenever you want to do your asynchronous work.

If you're sitting in front of your computer, it gives you something to focus on.

and just kind of knock that out whenever you're ready for it.

So I really enjoyed it.

It was good to take one more step and see kind of what goes on behind the curtain.

I'm definitely planning on staying with the organizing committee or with the organizers for a future, for at least one more cycle, but maybe indefinitely, we'll see where life takes us.

It's hard to say, but yeah, I really enjoyed it.


SPEAKER_03:
Awesome.

We want to appreciate all of our amazing facilitators who come from just

everywhere on the globe and presented in so many different ways, did so many different things for their interactive sessions and just made a lot of special experiences happen.

They facilitated participation and they showed up as participants too.

So facilitators, thanks for coming through and for just being there and helping make this happen.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I think, I mean, this is what makes the event right.

The facilitators are the crux of everything.

And so if you had fun and you enjoyed an interactive session and facilitated the mentorship, the office hours, the conversations, be sure to talk to them on Keybase.

You see the Keybase handles right there and thank them.

connect to them, you know, one on one on key base, keep those connections going, keep our community tight and connected.

And just send your appreciation.

And another great way to also send your appreciation, which we'll get to toward the end of the slide deck is donating to complexity weekend, right?

Like I was saying, we're completely volunteer run.

including the facilitators um and we do uh request uh donations they're not tax deductible yet um but the majority of those donations uh vast majority go toward an honorarium program that we give back to the facilitators it's not honoring you know it's not it's not valuing their time directly it's just a gift it's saying thank you for what you put into this process because that's really what made the magic happen so yeah thanks


SPEAKER_03:
thanks the committees were awesome we didn't have committees just a few months ago but they've been incredible the uh placemaking for contributing the gather space dot teams as mentioned for several of the amazing aspects of the pre-weekend and the single source of truth and the weekend itself

and several other committees that I know are going to be continuing to stay active or to begin their activity, like especially outreach and onboarding.

We'll see some things happening.

So committees are great teams and ways to participate.

If you don't exactly see any other opportunity, they're always there and there's a rhythm that you can just tap into and work that you can be nudged to do consensually.

Sean?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, sure.

So Complexity Weekend, we have a kind of a unique way of doing partnerships where we have two types of roles that you saw in the diagram earlier, the structural view of the community called supporters and associates.

And essentially supporters are people who are organizations that help out one

event at a time.

So we have some supporters we'll see in the next slide shortly that supported in either financial or in-kind means to this particular cohort, CW April 2022.

And for those supporters that actually find alignment in deep time with us, that's a strategic alignment for both organizations, they'll actually become associates.

So three associates that we have as part of our community so far are Innovators Box, Block Science, and Research Mentors, where Innovators Box has been providing facilitator mentorship with Monica King's amazing facilitation training, every cohort for the past several, and is also just a great global community of innovators that we're happy to be a part of.

And Block Science is a recent associate that has been helping us with our decentralized autonomous organization committee and modeling a lot of that.

They do a lot of complex systems modeling and especially DAOs and governance structures.

So I'm really happy that they'll be helping us on that committee, make sure that we build something that will last in deep time and we'll be able to self-govern effectively.

And then Research Mentors is a one-on-one mentorship network for research in any form, right?

That could be PhD students.

That could be someone in industry that wants to write papers based on work they've been doing in industry for a while.

It could be high schoolers who want to get into research, right?

It could be anybody, but the key is the one-on-one mentorship.

And that's something that we like to foster in our community are these one-on-one mentorships.

And while we go to the supporters slide, I'll just mention one aspect of supporting or being an associate, which if anyone out there is interested in this, just email us at complex weekend at gmail.com.

But one unique aspect is it's not just a macro level relationship.

It's not just org to org.

It's micro and it's macro.

Most of these organizations had a facilitator on the ground in this cohort, right?

And that's really key.

We want to have representation in our cohort at the participation level, right?

Every single role is also a participant, and that's something we don't ever want to lose.

And then so the two supporters that we really want to thank are ManaFall and Occlusions.

ManaFall helped us with our website committee and totally revamping our website.

So if you've been to complexityweekend.com and seen its update, it's amazing.

They did really amazing work.

So go check them out if you're thinking for your organization or perhaps even a team that came out of Complexity Weekend or otherwise.

They're a really great firm for helping you with web development and kind of full product design.

And then Eclosions and Michaela, a facilitator that was in this cohort from Eclosions, we really want to thank for

I'm just helping us with our branding, our marketing, our visual marketing, everything that I'm actually going to be speaking to on behalf of Mikaela in the team's presentations for the dot outreach committee that she's been helping with.

And her firm Ecosians is just helping us get out there and reach as many people as possible so that our community can be even more diverse, even more active,

reach out to everyone we can in the globe and get everyone involved in learning complexity that wants to.

Yeah, thanks to our associates and supporters.


SPEAKER_03:
Great.

Also, Sean, would you like to describe this part?

don't you go i'm going to go ahead and hop off because i'm going to get everyone lined up okay presentations but i'll see everyone in a bit thank you so this will be just the last note or two and then we'll hear from the teams so anyone who would like to is welcome to head to this paypal link to provide us with fiat type support financially or contact us if some other type of support you'd like to provide but

just know that your participation is the most important kind of support and recommendation so that's what enables us to have a value of no financial barrier to participation is the fact that many people show up and some do support us and so we're always exploring different ways we can stay sustainable through deep time and just recognize everyone's contributions to the community so that is a paypal link you can go to

We're going to hear from the teams.

Then we're going to have some closing feedback and discussion on the Jamboard.

And then after that, the live stream will end and we'll head over to the after party.

The after party is going to happen in the public CW atrium.

And that'll be posted in our Keybase team.

And the reason why we have the after party in the atrium is that it's the space where the monthly heartbeats also take place.

So this is sort of signaling ending our cohort experience or at least one phase of it and reentering a broader Complexity Weekend community.

and so we'll see how many people from the uh dot public from the previous cohorts and from those who haven't been in cohorts are there but we look forward to when this after party could be a time when the cohort is kind of at like the most exciting

moments of just sharing their team and directions and hearing from other teams that they may have not even known were happening in parallel and then we kind of like re-enter this more communal space where people can ask us like how was it and what what happened during the weekend what'd you do during the weekend or what are you gonna do now these are all fun questions any last thoughts jen or we'll head to the team's aspect


SPEAKER_04:
I'm excited to hear what the teams have been up to.


SPEAKER_03:
Excellent.

Okay.

Okay, so we are ready for a team presentation.

People can mute the live stream, by the way.

That's a good tip while they're here.

But come up to the top for anyone who's ready to present.

So perhaps Lou.

Yes.

Okay.

Awesome.

Hello, Lou.


SPEAKER_02:
Hello.

I am ready.

I am ready.

Can I just?


SPEAKER_03:
You are live up to say eight minutes for each of the teams and please just take it away.

And however you'd like to structure this, it's the floor is yours.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

The name of my project is Desire for Lost Einsteins.

The interest on researching this theme comes from a study that has been started by a group of researchers at Harvard University.

The lead researcher is Dr. Ray Chetty.

regarding the reinventing the American dream and specifically finding the lost Einsteins that typically do not have access to scientific education for a number of systemic issues.

The preliminary discussions with my team

has given us the opportunity to scope an overview for the project, which is basically to focus on accessibility of marginalized students at high school and students that are planning to go to college.

And we are thinking about gathering data sets about this demographics that can give us the insights about the deficiencies in the educational system, specifically in STEM domains.

Objective will be to use different elements of complexity science, including emergence, self-organizing, and computational modeling to curate perhaps a tool or a platform that may provide curriculum

or any other databases of education that could be available for free to these individuals and provide additional resources in order to facilitate accessibility in these communities.

At the moment, a team is working

set up with three people that are very interested.

One is Kay, Micaela, Ana, and myself.

We are looking for other domain experts, especially in data science, data modeling, computational,

and mathematical modeling, researchers, sociologists, anthropologists, software engineers, preferably full stack engineers, and UX designers.

We are planning to have a meeting in about two weeks to kind of develop a logic model about what we really want to focus the project on and the deliverables that we would like to produce.

Personally, I would like to see the opportunity to create a software tool, whether it's on the browser or a mobile app,

I would like to see a publication on the research that we are going to be doing and even bring experts in the documentary and film industry to maybe gather some storytelling from the data that we are going to be collecting to create a documentary or a short film.

And this is my update.

So I'm crossing my fingers.


SPEAKER_06:
Jen, I'd love for you to respond.

I know Lou was talking about anthropology, social sciences.

What do you think about all that?


SPEAKER_04:
I'm just taking it all in.

You know, I think it's Stephen Jay Gould, who's an evolutionary biologist some time, you know, decades ago said something to the effect of,

of I care less about the folds in Einstein's brain and more about the fact that there's been untold number of people who are just as brilliant, I paraphrase clearly, that have never had the access to science, that have lived and died

you know, toiling in fields or otherwise being denied access to the education and, you know, the structures of learning and so forth.

So I think this is a super exciting project.

Lou, I'm definitely going to get in touch with you over the next couple weeks so that I can make it to that meeting.

I've got some interesting synergies that I think might be able to contribute to the

And then, you know, of course, I'm an anthropologist, so might be able to fill in some of your gaps there.

You tend to be kind of data and technology oriented, but we'll see.

If I can't do it, I can find somebody who can.

And I'm looking forward to seeing how this moves forward because, you know, bringing more people in, making access for more people is definitely something I'm personally committed to.

So it'd be great to contribute.


SPEAKER_02:
Fantastic.

Thank you, Jen.

I'll reach out to be at a key base and I will update Coda documents as well and keep you posted for the next meeting.

Great.


SPEAKER_06:
Another question too.

Dan, I don't know how much time we have per team, but.

72 seconds.

Okay.

So one more question maybe.

And I don't know if you covered this already when I was gathering all the teams, but what has the pandemic done to these particular communities in terms of access to science?


SPEAKER_02:
The data that we are coming across is very devastating.

Some students never return, especially high school students in low income and rural communities never return to school.

Some of them lost parents during the pandemic and they were forced to find jobs and take care of siblings and other elder family members.

It is, the data is devastating.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you for facilitating and for taking the initiative here.

So really appreciate it and looking forward to working with you and seeing you in the future.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_03:
So Sean, you can grab the next team.

And just a reminder that anyone can go to the participant single source of truth and into the team section, see existing teams.

And that's where you'll find the contact information to get in touch with everybody who's going to be presenting today.

So thank you, Lou.

And Sean, you can bring up the next team.


SPEAKER_06:
Sure.

Lou, you want to step down and I'll grab the next person.

Yes.


SPEAKER_02:
How do I go away?


SPEAKER_03:
Neuropixel has completed the quote, Jen.

So the quote from Stephen Jay Gould was, I am somehow less interested in the weight and convolutions of Einstein's brain than in the near certainty that people of equal talent have lived and died in cotton fields and sweatshops.

So thanks for raising that too.


SPEAKER_04:
Yes, I knew my paraphrasing was loose.


SPEAKER_06:
You were like 85% of the way there.

I believe Ahmed should be here in a minute.

And Lou, do you mind using the down arrow key and you go ahead and hopping back into the green room?

Awesome.


SPEAKER_03:
Videoception.

This is just an OBS screen capture of the gather window.

Ahmed, welcome.


SPEAKER_05:
Hey, Devin.


SPEAKER_03:
I'll start the eight minutes when you begin and feel free to use it however you see fit and really looking forward to hearing what you have to share.


SPEAKER_07:
Okay.

First, I'd like to thank the organizers and everyone who participated.

On behalf of myself and the team, the Psycho Financial Thermodynamics team, we had an amazing time.

This is my first Complexity Weekend, and it's definitely not going to be my last.

What happened was...

We came from very different disciplines, my team members and myself, whether it's Vienna, Abishek, or CPX Tony,

What we discovered was that we all share a very passionate concern about how the financial systems in the world are affected by the lack of awareness of their own complexity, specifically in the way that these financial systems handle risk

um and usually work in an attempted predictive manner um because our disciplines are are diverse um abhishek comes from a

a investment background.

I come from a startup and innovation specific product management background.

And Vienna comes from a quite diverse law, financial, and crypto background.

And in addition to Anthony, who is a fresh grad from Vietnam, currently in Chicago, who is also very interested in phenomena related to

um how complexity affects policy making and social instability and social disruption so what we ended up with was a team highly concerned about the macro and micro phenomena within complexity and the impact of the financial systems on the individual or small groups be it startups or organizations and on a macro level be it global

phenomena within economics or within nation states.

What we've come to do with this team is to explore topics that are quite broad, that range from continental philosophies, roots within the current financial system and how complexity could change the perspective on that.

We're very, very keen on talking about these things or bringing them some oxygen by starting a conversation.

We're currently serious about doing a podcast.

We'll be discussing that in the future.

The questions that we're trying to address are

How can regenerative finance be transitioned to?

How we might internalize a global financial system where the hidden dynamics are acting on us in every moment.

And it's a very complex adaptive system that we should be aware of.

what conditions for micro and macro fractal phenomena can be observed or perceived in our present potential in the future like stuff related to the individual on a mental state on a mental level relationships between individuals and its impact on whether it's global economy or the planet and

How hot your wallet is from a crypto point of view within an emerging economy, that is like billions of dollars being poured into.

In essence, we're most interested about conversations, which is, for someone like me who likes to talk a lot, perfect.

But I do hope that we actually come up with actionable results that are measurable and quantifiable.

And that's product manager in me.

And we hope that anyone who'd like to participate in this conversation to contribute.

And the more diverse, the better.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you.

Awesome.

Could you maybe unpack the title of the team and just what inspired that connection?


SPEAKER_07:
Well, so it's the title of the team is Psycho Financial Thermodynamics.

So what happened was we started the conversation and

What we realize is that being in a complex static system, the way that the flow in general of what we're discussing from a philosophical point of view and from a practical point of view, specifically with Web3 and crypto, is a far from equilibrium system.

That was Abhishek's contribution, if I recall correctly, where what he's attempting to do through his investment fund, which...

this is a nudge if you want to check him out, post event, is working on regenerative finance by re-examining the models that are currently being used in investment and finance.

The cycle part was basically based on how the individual perceives phenomena like crypto.

and their relation to the general stock market and personal finance management.

So it's considering these really two critical pillars.

that I, if I'm not mistaken, I kept pounding and shoving down everyone's throat, referring to narrative, in particular to a recent book by Schiller, the Nobel laureate in economics about narrative economics and how that really does affect on an individual and a societal level, the narratives that we perceive our world through.

And I think that would cover all three.

So psycho, financial, thermodynamics.


SPEAKER_03:
Awesome.

Thank you for sharing.


SPEAKER_06:
And Sean?

Dan, which was just, how do you make a system aware of its own complexity?

Or like, what are you hoping that effect would do?

You kind of started with that.


SPEAKER_07:
Well, what I

I'd rely on in answering that question would be a work published in, I'm not sure which edition of a magazine by MIT, I believe it was David Snowden, that what you want to do normally is that we think in anticipatory ways.

We try to predict the future.

While in complexity, in the complex domain, what we try to do is we try to become

um instead of more robust because prediction is about robustness right you want to maintain what you currently have not the identity you want to maintain the the organization that you're in or or that system um but with complexity resilience is the key word and so what we do is we become aware of our present state and the potentialities of the future instead of actually um um predicting what the future would be and acting towards that so um

Usually, the way that we approach, and I speak as an apprentice in this field, is we begin by examining the constraints around the system and by categorizing these constraints, the complex domain, according to framework, which is a seminal work on complex adaptive systems, also by David Snowden and Cognitive Edge.

would basically look at constraints being enabling constraints.

So when we would like to create a system or when we'd like to raise awareness of a system's complexity, we would begin by the constraints.

and the energy gradients involved, the level of uncertainty.

So when you see a combination of enabling constraints, some high energy levels, energy gradients, you can begin adopting certain tools that are more adapt to the complex domain, things like SenseProbe and ACT.

setting up safety failed experiments, observing the results, and then moving towards a more complicated domain.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you very much.

Awesome to hear about just how the complexity ideas and the specifics and the generals come together.

So let's grab the third team, and we will be hearing from...

I believe the complex weekend dot teams committee.


SPEAKER_06:
Yep.

Thank you.

Amen.

That was awesome.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

Waiting for the next person to come and join us.

These are awesome and riveting already.

And I want to pay more, but I know.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_04:
We got to hold the space for them to talk about their own stuff.

So, but it's, it's yeah.

I mean,

I'm always astonished with what people come together to work on.


SPEAKER_03:
Awesome.


SPEAKER_04:
All right, next up.


SPEAKER_03:
Greetings, Jessica.

Welcome and thanks for presenting on the DOT Teams committee at CW.

So I'll start the timer and just go for it.


SPEAKER_01:
Hi.

Thank you, Daniel.

I didn't get what you said, so I'm going to be talking on behalf of the Teams committee, which is made up of Kai, Stephen, Sarah, you, Daniel, Sean, and now we have a new member, which is Lou.

So we have to celebrate that.

And yeah, so that Teams committee, we're hoping to just create an experiment with different tools to

make the experience of working together better and find ways that we can create like deeper bonds.

Because I think like here in Complexity Weekend, this is like one thing that we really believe in is like that working together and like not only do we get to solve problems,

like create a change in the world by, you know, like unpacking complexity and working on projects that we feel we're, you know, deeply like passionate about and we feel can make a change in the world, but it can also like bring us closer.

And I think that's like the key thing about like Complexity Weekend is like that bond and that like strong community sense that we have.

And I think working in teams allow for that.

And also like, you know, like,

you know, we have like different like skill sets that we bring on, you know, to the team and like working together, we can learn from each other and we are here to learn.

And so that's why, you know, we, you know, believe a lot in teams.

And so like that teams committee is, you know,

finding ways to make that work better.

So we're looking for new members always.

And yeah, we meet every other Tuesday at 15 UTC.

So please come at our atrium.

So I have to give a shout out to our meeting.

So please come.


SPEAKER_06:
Um, Jessica, I think maybe one, one great, uh, thing to talk about would be, uh, kind of the team's process, uh, in the pre, uh, even before the pre-weekend and then during the pre-weekend and then the weekend itself.

What, what was the thinking there with, with, you know, the, uh, I was involved for the early part of it and I stepped away and I came back and I was delighted to see this like team seeds and sprouting process.

That was awesome.

Like, like where did all that come from?

How did it come about?

What was it like to work in the committee setting?


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, I think.

yeah working on

here at Complexity, it's always like any idea that we can have, there's always like space to talk about it and to explore.

So it's always like very open and freeing to just like anything that comes to mind, there's a space for it.

And so like all the members, I think have felt the same way that it's like, okay, if you have something that you think could be improved, or there's an idea that you have,

like share it and we can like unpack it together and i think even like the committee itself has started so like with that mindset it's like okay and teams is something that's very valuable and like important for on the work that we do here and how we come together and and like what are some of the um the things that could be done

Last Complexity Weekend, there was a catechism that was introduced and that helped a lot with the process.

And so we were thinking like, okay, what are the ways can we work to improve that system?

And through thinking through that, we started looking at, okay, maybe we can divide that process in two forms.

and one and to see the teams and and you know start putting so like this is the idea and say like if one person uh comes with an idea or even throughout on the weekend like we did different activities and that could help um sprout and some of that and i think also like

but not gonna take credit on the team sitting but i believe the connection between ahmed and vienna was made at the team seating on on session on friday and so you know we're thinking like okay what are the different ways that we can bring people together and and you know and

putting sort of like the team seed form and as a sort of like an initial intention like this is an idea i have who is interested in this topic and coming together and and then bringing that to the next level it's like okay now we have formed the team and and we're ready to sprout and and i was like i i spoke to nathaniel another member of the community and he said like like

To him, it seemed like the process was very intuitive just by the name of it.

And seeding, you're planting the seed, you're starting, and then as you're growing and starting to develop, you can grow.

And so he felt that it was very intuitive.

and and i think it will have to give um talk to like kai because i think with her biomimicry i think she informed a lot of that idea of using nature and to guide that process

And yeah, so basically we were sort of like, you know, iterating, experimenting throughout the last few months on like, you know, how we can make the process better.

And again, this is just experimenting.

And so a lot of things we have done and we will revisit, see how we can improve it.

And, you know, and like we want new members to have like more new wonderful ideas to keep that going.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you, Jessica.

Awesome.

And yes, it'll be great to see how dot teams develops.

So thank you and see you later.


SPEAKER_01:
See you.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, so the next upcoming teams that present are going to be Sean with a with a slight double header on placemaking and outreach committees.

Oh, very nice.


SPEAKER_06:
Almost ready for the after party.

Not quite.


SPEAKER_03:
Yes.

Awesome.

And then I will.

Hey.

Wait, facilitators can live together?

Then I'll present on the project active block prints, and then we'll have data farmers by Carolina CC.

So Sean, go for it with placemaking.


SPEAKER_06:
Sure, let me just share a window.

Yeah, so I'm gonna speak on two committees.

Basically, the first one is placemaking.

So placemaking,

What I'm going to share here is just a diagram of the gather space that the placemaking committee built actually for November.

And we're kind of in a reorg process right now.

But basically,

So we didn't improve the Gather space much this time, but the scope of the placemaking committee is really to build a sense of place just for our global community of practice.

And that can mean in Gather.town, which is our current kind of synchronous audiovisual platform that we're using, or it could mean on Keybase, the asynchronous text-based backend to the community, or it could be on the platform Coda, which we're using for all of the single source of truth

kind of almost like a wiki, a modern wiki tool.

But it's not just about what platforms we inhabit together as an online community and remote teams.

It's how they're glued together and kind of stitched together.

And it's really about trying to create a cohesive, flow-inducing, just sense of home online, really, that kind of warmth you feel of kind of being back in a space that's familiar but also novel.

Right.

And and really, I think it's a really great opportunity to learn complexity by doing in a kind of a safe environment because it's one of the more established committees that we've had at Complexity Weekend.

It was called the Gather Committee for people who've been in the community for a while, and it got kind of generalized into this broader sense of place.

But I want to kind of point out this diagram because I think it's really interesting to see what a group of people have come up with.

And I just want to think Shirley and Steven and Sasha are lots of people who have contributed to these ideas.

But this is like our home we've been in for the weekend.

And people who are participants will recognize this layout and can remember

you know, going over to the garden area and finding the little puppy that you could find, you know, this time around.

Or, you know, playing the games on the tables or finding the go-karts that we had kind of discovered this time too and zooming all over the spaces.

Or we're actually here in the team co-working room right now where this time around we've filled every single team co-working space.

And it was fun just walking down the aisles and seeing all this collaboration between all these global remote teams.

And hopping up here into the video recording studio and taking the teams up like we're doing now.

And it's just very flowy and this sense of embodiment and being just in a place.

It's not physical, but it feels kind of like it.

And this is all by design in this group setting.

We had a lot of live facilitator sessions in these rooms that were designed by the committee.

to have particular interaction zones that are generic, but also can have specific embodied interactions within them that are kind of a fun canvas for facilitators to paint

their paintings within.

So these are kind of some of the ideas we like to think about.

How can we even, in the future, tie these platforms even tighter together?

Maybe put them on complexityweekend.com in a very unified way so it doesn't feel like there's multiple platforms and you have that kind of fatigue across platforms.

And then one other thing I guess I'll say about placemaking is it really is kind of a, of all the committees in Complexity Weekend, it is

One of the more central ones, because it's really about the complexity we can values and how those are upheld as we glue everything, all the other committees are doing together into one cohesive sense of place.

So it's a really fun community to be a part of.

We meet every Wednesday morning Pacific time, and that's always subject to change based on who's participating because we're a global community.

So we always have to keep time zone in mind and ideally spread the

work around times to make sure we have active synchronous and asynchronous participation.

But really, that's all I really want to say about placemaking.

If you're interested in joining that placemaking committee, just email complexityweekend at gmail.com.

And it's a lot of fun.

So I think with that, unless Dan or Jenny have questions, I can talk about the other committee.


SPEAKER_04:
No, that sounds great.

I know that I've gotten feedback, positive and negative about the space.

I'll share that through the feedback.

And I did pet a puppy.

I have to admit.

So I was absolutely charmed by that.


SPEAKER_06:
I will bring up a bit of feedback we had from Doug, one of our facilitators, who was talking about another platform he's used for these types of events.

where you don't walk around.

You actually click and you just appear in a space with others.

And he was talking about how he really preferred that because in this space, he felt it was, for his personal sensibilities, it was a bit noisy for him.

Maybe he wasn't maximizing windows maybe when he could have, but people walking around

sometimes would distract him when he's trying to talk to somebody and we started talking about how people have different perceptions of space and maybe the best solution um just like our participation modes when we design for complexity weekend is try to make all the different participation modes equally valid and and kind of different lenses you can

experience and participate through so maybe there is the gatherer.town synchronous audio visual layer that we're used to right now or the current form of place or synchronous place at least but maybe there's another version of it where you don't have to walk around and you can just teleport between the sessions and that's the way you want to and you just you're always in a zoom like interface of video feeds and you're never a little 2d pokemon avatar right and

And that might allow a certain audience to enjoy the experience more the way they want to, but maybe they can be sewn together and be different lenses.

And so these are just ideas that we think about in the placemaking committee in an effort to align with our Complex Weekend values and create a space that is, it works for everyone, maybe, and we, sorry, I'm going to keep rambling, but

There was one other conversation real quick that came up that was really cool.

Actually, we were talking about this in the space.

It was about should we build a space that's comfortable for everyone?

Is that even possible?

Is that the right thing to do?

Or is it

better maybe to build a place that has many diverse subplaces and you can vote with your feet as to where you want to be, right?

Like, which is the better move?

I know, Jen, we had talked about, you know, Western assumptions kind of in how we're building a sense of place.

And is it right to make a bland gray place that has assumptions too?

And

Is that really the way you want to go?

Or, you know, do you want to allow all the different cultures to have a sense of place?

So, Jen, what do you think about that?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, you know, and we've talked about this, you know, the built environment, it's like the rules of chess.

It both constrains what we're able to do, but through the rules that are just implicit in the built environment, make infinite amount of creativity possible.

And, yeah, I'm in team, I don't think there is a perfect space.

And since I know Complexity Weekend through time, I know that we're not wedded to any one particular thing.

We're always looking for innovation and how to change things up and to make things more welcoming.

And, you know, like I think that there's just like different geometries, circles versus rectangles.

and, you know, like foster different types of interactions, you know, for definitely a Western culture callback is, you know, like the difference of having a boardroom with a long table with a head at it versus King Arthur and the round table where everybody's seated around as equals.

And that I think that we're all very conscious about this.

But I mean, I think this is going to be just like a really interesting iterative process.

to see how complexity weakens virtual space, physical space evolves through time, including the kind of the meta space of the different tools that we use, like Coda was new to us, this cycle, and like, you know, and maybe we're still working on integration.

How does this all flow together?

So I think it's just, we're just at one point,

In a long journey.

Of exploring.

The spaces for this event.

To take place in.

And there's never going to be a perfect.

Destination.

Hopefully we'll never ossify.

Into like okay this is it.

the Coliseum or, you know, like just a blank field, you know, there's some butterflies and some trees off in the distance, you know, whatever it is, you know, I don't think we'll ever get to like one final layout, but I'm excited to see like, and since we do have control over, we can just add rooms as we see fit or delete rooms if we don't feel like they're useful.

And so, yeah, so hopefully maybe we can, I'm always hopeful with future events,

we'll always build out a room for a facilitator.

And I always like wish we could do more of that is like to kind of get the sessions thinking about it's like, okay, I really want to do this, but I need it to be in a physically different space.

Like I need it to be, we're sitting on top of a hill and then we'll figure out how to make that happen and gather or whatever environment that we're using.


SPEAKER_06:
And a great example of that.

And the last thing about place being happy to talk about forever is Steven's let one of our facilitators, this cohort and repeat facilitator, you'll probably know him in the community.

This time around, you know, when his live session was coming up, we swapped out the portal title.

So it was actually, Jen, you were there, Dan, you were there.

You know, people went to the live session and like they were expecting the normal one and poof, they're in a different space entirely.

And the more facilitators come back and are repeat facilitators and they get used to the affordances of our place,

they become a little more empowered to try different things and push the envelope.

And, you know, I know Jenny done things like that, like speed dating type live sessions and blues done things with like, you know, different games and putting boxes of pictures and you have to guess the composite picture, you know, through interaction.

And it's just getting more and more robust and interesting.

And I think the space will allow for that as, as facilitators kind of step into the affordances more, but I've talked way too much about placemaking.

So we should probably switch over.


SPEAKER_03:
those who are listening.

Hey, we're going to have Sean give the dot outreach CW committee summary.

Then I'll present on active block prints with anybody who wants to join for that.

And then data farmers with Carolina.

And also if anybody else wants to do something on the stream, they can do that.


SPEAKER_06:
Let's have you both talk about this.

Okay.

So switching over to outreach committee, right?

So this is a committee that's purposes really to

maintain um how diverse our community is our facilitators the participants that show up by reaching out to basically as many communities as possible and and with there's lots of messaging we'll talk about here um one that i like and obviously because i'm on stage is uh the idea that you know we're trying to solve some really difficult problems that take lots of different perspectives to solve so maybe we can go out in the world and tell people

like we need your perspective to have a seat at the table like we need we need your perspective um we need everyone's perspective at this king arthur around this table you know that jen was talking about um so how can we go out and talk to these different communities and mindsets and ways of thinking to bring them all here so that we have as maximally diverse as possible cohort and and teams and um outcomes right and so um this was actually really great i'm speaking on behalf of michaela

who ran three live sessions this weekend talking about how to change up the messaging and the brand and the visual identity of Complexity Weekend.

And it was really amazing sessions like

People were throwing all sorts of ideas out there.

So I want to just maybe, Dan and Jen, to put this up.

If you can see the post-its, maybe pick a couple each that resonated with you.

And we'll do a couple of these slides.

And just these are all ideas from maybe 30 people total.

I don't know how many total over the three sessions.

But what are some that stand out to you?


SPEAKER_04:
Oh, for me?

Now, of course, I have to, like, peer with my bifocals at my screen, which is still a big screen.

So it's not just because it uses big words, but just, like, the concept.

Davos for the people.

I, like, I've got to get into more of that.

And I love improv for the brain.

Those are the first two that jump out at me.

But I need to, like, kind of stare at some smaller text a little bit longer.

Okay.


SPEAKER_06:
Which of these resonate with you right now?

The values associated with flexi, and that was the prompt.


SPEAKER_03:
Also, I can only see the ones with the larger font size.

But I guess that's kind of a metaphor for how things are.

I like alive.

that captures a lot of the open-endedness and also the goal-drivenness of organisms and other living systems.

So that's pretty cool.

And this was a really creative and amazing session also.


SPEAKER_06:
Absolutely.

So I'm just going to pick out some of these things.

I think they're fun.

Like one of them I liked was Complexity Buffet.

It was a great one, a question feast.

Governance of the Active I thought was cool for how we like to run our organization.

These are all just values that we have.

Going on to another prompt, what we can be in a year, a co-created home, a space for things to happen.

And it's like the how, why, and the what.

These are just exercises we went through on this really cool digital post-it board space called Jamboard.

Deep time, trying to mature our organization a bit, maybe being able to govern ourself as a DAO.

Other prompts we went through, like, what do you wish Kibbutz Weekend to become in the long term?

Right.

So always evolving, profitable, which is interesting.

You know, we haven't explored that too much yet, but that's that's obviously part of if we're going to be here a thousand years from now, as somebody put, we've got to figure that part out.

Right.

We've got to, you know, how do we be scalable?

Junction of pockets of the future existing in the present, I think, is a cool idea.

Way to put it.

Marie, what do you think?

What is something that maybe you stand out to you and what people might wish CW to become in the long run?


SPEAKER_08:
I like what you just shared, junction of pockets of the future.


SPEAKER_05:
What does that mean to you?

Oh, wait, can you speak equal to the microphone?

Yeah.

What does that mean to you, John?


SPEAKER_08:
I was just here for the party.

I think it's just being present together while simultaneously creating the future.

I think that's pretty powerful.

Yeah.

Um, and then on the earlier, um, I think Dallas for the people.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah.

Like, what does that mean?

You know, that came from Jackson facilitator, um, a few quotes, uh, ago, uh, you know, maybe that's the idea of being able to, you know,

Um, have everyone from every country represented and talking about the problems and resolving them, but it not being some far off, you know, location of, of the rich and powerful.

It's like, it's in the power is actually in our hands and kind of has been the whole time.

I think these are just some of the things that we've been exploring in these sessions.

And it's something that Michaela is going to work with the Dot Outreach team and anyone here listening might want to participate in so that we can get our messaging and our brand established so that we, you know, you see this bottoms up way in which we're trying to define it.

That's what we want to sense make as our community ourselves and then go shout it on top of a mountain and let the world know what amazingness we've been.

doing for the last two and a half years.

Yeah, I mean, that's pretty much, I mean, we can go forever.

So maybe I'll just stop there and we'll pull in the next team.

What do you think?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I think the way to get involved in that outreach work is also to email complexityweekend.gmail.com.

Just say what you're interested in and then we'll pick a regular time and a way to allocate tasks that works for everybody who wants to contribute.


SPEAKER_04:
Again, just any participation, since it is leadership of the active, I thought that was an interesting one, is you can have a big impact.

So if there's something here that jumps out or if there's something here that you think is missing, definitely reach out because you're going to get heard.


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks.

All right, so I'll go ahead and close that out.

So yeah, committees are a fun place to learn complexity by doing.

So it's email complexity at gmail.com if you're interested.

Awesome.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, if anybody would like to come discuss the active blockference that is going to present now.

Okay.

So we're going to do active blockference and then we will have data farmers.

Okay.

So for this, I guess nobody will join, but this is a large team or a medium large team.

And I'm going to switch over to what we filled out as a team in our Coda page.

All right.

So what I'll share here is the information that we put into our sprouting team form.

because the sprouting form is intended to ask some of the questions that help the team clarify what it is that they are doing and to make the team able to be communicated.

So although I am one of the participants on this team, the idea is that this information is accessible from just a one page type summary of this.

And it's actually in the conversations around addressing these questions that a lot of the

important points come to to rise so um it won't take the full time and so jan and sean any thoughts you have are welcome so currently our team consists of of uh jacob myself blue and jessica as well as several others such as ahmed and arhan and

a bunch of others who are participating in different ways and everybody is welcome to add their name.

There isn't like a minimum level of contribution that warrants adding one's name.

This is like an open source project.

So even just being following and listening and watching and asking questions is totally a participant.

So if you want to find out what we do synchronously when we meet twice a week on Wednesdays or asynchronously, everybody's welcome to get involved.

The team does expect to stay engaged with the broader Complexity Weekend community, and that also speaks to some of the main topics that the team is involved in.

The form wrote that the continued engagement is going to look like development of accessible on-ramps into two main areas.

So the first area is research and tool development related to cognitive modeling, which can refer to basically latent or unobserved aspects of all kinds of behavioral systems.

If what we observe is behavioral, then what we're modeling that gives rise to what we observe is like the cognitive.

and so different kinds of systems can exhibit different cognitive properties and that's what this area of research is related to and also we're interested in modern cognitive systems online and so the way that we're exploring that and applying some of the generalities in a specific setting

is by looking into Web3 systems design.

So DeFi, decentralized finance, decentralized autonomous organizations, DAOs, and other kinds of cyber social constellations.

So like different arrangements of information and people and computers.

The team is open to having participants join.

There's an email address that you can contact here or message anybody who's in the team.

The team will present on the live stream.

It's happening now.

Blue writes in the chat, I heard you are paging me, but phone affordances are limited.

It's okay, Blue.

Thank you.

What are the team's objectives and motivations?

And that's actually where I'll close it, unless there's any other thoughts or questions.

But what active block inference is, it's an open source package for complex systems modeling that involves active inference.

And it's built upon a complex modeling framework called CAD-CAD, which is

what is built by block science.

And so we kind of have some facilitators at the micro who over the years have helped expose us to these tools.

And now the time is here when we're using those tools and connecting that more systems engineering approach to active inference and cognitive science.

An active inference is a framework that helps us integrate perception, cognition, and action in different kinds of entities.

So we could use it to model how a smart contract behaves or how an API behaves on a computer, as well as how humans might act with all these complex cognitive features like memory and anticipation and counterfactuals.

And the next steps that we're going to take are going to be to develop this Active Blockfronts toolkit, specifically looking into simulations and case studies that will bring value to different financial and research and education ecosystems in Web3.

and also educational materials and documentation that will help onboard people to this type of work.

So that is the Active Blockference project, if anybody wants to join or learn more.

And there's a few minutes if anybody here wants to ask a question or add a thought.


SPEAKER_06:
So Vienna, just so you know, you're on live stream.

You're welcome to be here if you want to.

You're welcome to actually ask questions.

We've got two more teams that are going to present.

Why don't you stick around if you want and ask some questions to them.

Dan, I guess maybe, not supposed to be a question, I guess, but maybe just go over Active Inference a little bit more, just so that people know really what it is and how it feeds into this whole thing.


SPEAKER_03:
Active Inference, it's a relatively recent developed framework for modeling behavior and cognition, where relatively recent is about the last five to ten years.

There's a lot of ways to enter into this answer and conversation.

So I hope people find many different flavors of this conversation.

But I think one way that makes sense here is that it's built upon a very basic and generalizable partitioning of an entity or a system of interest

apart from its niche or surroundings and so in that ways it's a lot like the agent-based modeling framework but rather than thinking about that only in the context of an ant in a grid this is a way to think about that partitioning of entities from their environment in terms of like what causes what and what is associated with what

that partitioning is happening in a very generalizable way that helps model systems that are bounded from different kinds of environments differently.

So the USB cable separates to computational elements and the conversation separates to human speakers.

And those are like different kinds of interfaces that there's a common modeling language for.


SPEAKER_04:
Dan, any other questions?

No, I'm just, you know,

kind of diving into the active inference stuff right now.

So I've got some resources that I'm going to be reading on.

So I think that give me a month and I'll have a lot of thoughts.

So I might be like, no, Dan, I got to be on the team now.

So because, yeah, I mean, but I'm always a contrarian in so many ways because, you know, I find that

When I talk to a lot of other social scientists, because what I do is quantitative, I'm like, I'm like a wonk.

Like, and then when I talk to data scientists, I'm like this hopeless hippie.

So, you know, like, I don't, I don't fit in everywhere.

No, I just fit in nowhere.

So let me, let me delve into this more and let like the second ship do some processing on it.

And I'll grab you in a couple of weeks and be like, but wait, I've got questions.


SPEAKER_06:
I've got one more quick question and then we actually have two more teams.

Safa just submitted a team seed actually with somebody and then we'll do Carolina.

But my quick question is just, you went through kind of some examples, but maybe like, I know we've talked about this a little bit, Dan, with like decentralized science organizations and processes.

What's like a really kind of example in that space that's kind of simple to understand?


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks, great question.

And I can think about it.

It's what I thought about when hearing Lou share about the Deci for lost Einsteins.

And it made me think about affordances, which is a way that we use modeling of what each entity is capable of doing.

So for example, structural differences could be associated with how individuals have different affordances, different opportunities for action.

So that's one way that we take like a technical term and associate it with the phenomena that we care about.

And then another one would be like behavior and decision making in active inference is split into like a pragmatic value, like reward and an epistemic value, like learning or reducing uncertainty about how reward is achieved.

And so understanding in a personalized way how different participants in education and research ecosystems, like at different times in their journey or as context change, might need a little bit more of pragmatic value or a little bit more of epistemic value might go a long way towards helping many journeys stay in the game.


SPEAKER_06:
Perfect.

That's great.

I think I'm going to pull Sasha in.

Just one second.

And Sasha's team is Exploratorium.

I think that might be copyrighted.


SPEAKER_03:
Wow, what a great name.


SPEAKER_04:
I've been reading some Twitter threads about, like, did you have to use the name of my book for your website?

And so forth.

So people got really excited.


SPEAKER_06:
You're just commenting that we think the name of your team might be copyrighted.

Exploratorium.


SPEAKER_00:
The original name of the team was going to be just a question mark, so...


SPEAKER_03:
Wow.

Go for it.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

OK, so yeah, as you mentioned, we submitted the team seed literally at the last possible moment.

And it spawned from Andrew or Octopus had a facilitated session around questions.

And that was really exciting and led to more questions.

And so we decided to form a team seed to explore the space of questions and how they can be used, useful as a tool for going on the complexity science journey.

And so, yeah, there's kind of two approaches that we have.

One is to develop a holistic framework for the use of questions in education.

So thinking about what kinds of questions there are and what answers they lead to and about the relationship between questions and answers.

And the second one would direction is to connect this framework to the research domain and applications where a level of certainty is needed.

And so how questions get used in research design.

And these are just some of the kind of broad directions that we could come up with because yeah, just going about the idea of classifying questions is,

really complex and goes in many different directions.

And so I think that's not even clear of how mapping out that space will look like.

But yeah, very exciting spawn from a facilitation session.

And the team is open.

So currently it's

myself at Squasha, um, and, uh, Andrew at 8typus on Keybase.

And so, uh, we're looking for participants who want to contribute or have, um, yeah, experience, um, with using questions in an education and export exploratory setting.


SPEAKER_06:
I've got a question, which is just, you're open to new members.

What types of members are you hoping for?

What would help round out the team?

What are maybe some goals that you might work toward that team members could help with?


SPEAKER_00:
I think it can range from the

broad, just wondering about the epistemology of questions to the specific of how questions can be used as a tool for people onboarding onto CW.

So I'm imagining this is like my crazy idea.

Next to the information booth, there's like a question lab.

And so you can iterate questions about what you're exploring and that will help you figure out who to talk to and where to go on your journey.

Um, complexity journey.

So yeah, really anyone who is interested by this concept, because I found it endlessly interesting and we're just coming up with more and more questions as we were talking about it.


SPEAKER_06:
I'm imagining the gather graphic already.

It's like a signpost, but instead of arrows pointing where to go, it's just a bunch of question marks.


SPEAKER_00:
Exactly.

And we don't have a set timeline, but we're going to touch base with the team at the end of May and go from there.


SPEAKER_03:
Excellent.

Thank you, Alexandra.

All right.

So we will have Data Farmers with Carolina.

Sean, you can obtain.

And also anyone else who wants to come on the live stream, I'll spotlight and give a final call.

So everyone, we are going to have Data Farmers.

present on the live stream.

And then anybody who would like to come to the top half of the room that I'm in and join the live stream is also welcome to do so.

Just give any final closing notes or thoughts on the public live stream.

So welcome, Carolina.

And please take it away.


SPEAKER_10:
Thank you, Daniel.

And thank you, everyone, for another amazing Complexity Weekend.

So I'm representing Data Farmers.

which is essentially a learning by doing Python team.

So I will explain.

We're just a group of people wanting to learn Python.

And we think that many of us have some programming experience and we're self-taught, but we do know that accountability to learning increases massively.

if you're learning with others.

So we thought that this would maybe be a place to find other people that would want to learn with us and then apply it to an actual real-world problem as a case study or as a way to learn by doing.

And for this, maybe I need to give a little bit of context to those who weren't at the session yesterday.

But what me and my co-facilitator, Vian, are working on is

data engineering and data science framework to help small community farms in Africa prove the impact that they're having in their communities to help them access new ways of funding.

So what we're doing is creating all of this framework

And essentially, it's associated to a very simple app, and it guides projects through the whole process of taking a look at where their initial conditions are for starting up.

There's actually other types of ecosystem services and community projects, but the one that we chose for here are the urban farms.

So to guide...

any kind of project leads or people wanting to start one of these urban farm community projects to take a look at the initial conditions, what they have, what they would need, then help give them information about their local environment.

So what are the actual demands from local restaurants or local businesses so that they can put that into the planning of their own business model for sustainable income.

and then just really helping them gather the data in simple ways.

Like let's break with all of these really current frameworks of monitoring and verification that exclude people really, that are really

require massive amounts of time resources and sometimes people with access to higher education can't even manage so how will a small community project of people that are really working on the ground and doing the work and don't have time for that but they are the ones actually having the impact so we'll

help them know and figure out what they have to capture just to prove to the funders what impact they're having and that the project is on the ground, all the effort they're putting into it.

And also after gathering the data and storing it, we have automated reporting that just generates the presentable documents very easily.

And then once the certain, let's say,

Targets are achieved, the data can be, and the impact claims can be tokenized to the centralized ledger on Hedera.

And they can be essentially sold on impact markets.

Yes.

And all of this we have currently, the data size part of it is in R, but we want to have some more

predictive models and some more complex modeling in the future.

So we're going to need deep learning.

And we've all heard that Python is the best for this.

So that's why we want to learn it.

And then we want to translate what we have to potentially develop more things.

So yes, this is, I'm going to shut up now, but this is what we've been doing and the team is open.

So anyone interested in joining, interested in learning more, just reach out on Keybase at Carolina.

underscore CC.

Yeah.

And come join us on the learning journey.


SPEAKER_06:
Wow.

That's awesome.

I have a question, which is, you know, the team is learning by doing with Python instead of maybe just going with what they already know to build, you know, using R because you're already familiar with it or something like that.

I think it's awesome.

How does that kind of impact the timeline that you're thinking for building some of this stuff?

You know, are you taking into account the learning curve and

And yeah, how does that impact?


SPEAKER_10:
Yeah, I think first we're going to start really by just learning.

We're not even worried about at this point the outcome because what we have in R already works.

So if we want to onboard projects into it, it will work as soon as we have the final platform prototype.

So we're focusing really we're going to meet next week.

It's already next week for me.

It's already Monday for a lot of people.

No, it's not.

So we're going to meet the first week of May to go over some resources, kind of learning journey that we want to go on.

And we will really focus about just learning Python together and experimenting with it.

And then once we feel like we're comfortable, I can actually start taking a look at what we have in R, the simplest parts of it, and start translating it together

And then who knows, just the team together, what opportunities might come up, what other ideas might come up to improve it even.

So we're very open at this point, just learning at first, just enjoying the learning journey together, and then just thinking about other outcomes later.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks.

I have a question.

Yeah, sorry for stepping on you there.

I want to loop back to like some more other complexity weekend themes like about inclusion and thinking maybe a little bit about decolonization and how we include and collaborate with stakeholders.

Now, of course, you can't collaborate with every potential small farmer everywhere in the world.

But do you have a way of active collaboration with at least some tiny little sample of convenience of your target audience?


SPEAKER_10:
Yes, so me and Vian are part of a startup in South Africa, African Data Technologies, and we are working with partners on the ground.

So we've already been helping, like the platform isn't even...

The first prototype is coming out very soon, but it's really about working with people on the ground.

The South African reality really is that it's very complex.

There's so many factors at play, and many of them of these historical colonization factors that you just mentioned.

So it really is about looking at what's possible, what are the difficulties, being honest about them, and then together with the people that are working on the ground, building a data framework that is feasible.

Because if we're sitting behind the computer thinking, oh, this will really work for them, here, just use it, it's just probably going to fail, really.

So it will be obviously an iterative process, just...

working with the teams on the ground, seeing if it's useful, seeing what's difficult.

And I mean, it's software.

We can always keep updating it and we can always adjust to the reality, even if it changes, hopefully.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks.

That sounds like a really great foundation for inclusion.


SPEAKER_03:
Awesome.

And yeah, Sean, if you want to grab anyone else, but it does bring together many themes and what across these projects, one theme and value that came to mind is like deep time.

It's not just about the weekend.

These are some big areas that people brought up in these teams and in the 14 team seeds that we saw and in all the relationships and the seeds and the sprouts that will come.

And so like,

how much can happen during the sprint to finish and what can really be compared and contrasted at the end of a weekend but it just feels amazing that we're all starting and our threads came together to be part of this cohort and then in just a few minutes we're going to go to the atrium

where we kind of return to the main open community space of Complexity Weekend.

And then we have a couple more heartbeats and then another weekend cohort is going to be happening soon.

So the cycle kind of begins again with all of these amazing frictions and tensions and appreciations and connections that we make with the cohort.

And then again, we sort of turn over and return back to the bigger picture.

Sean?


SPEAKER_06:
let's go back to the slide deck and just put up the feedback form again.

Yeah.

And then put up the atrium.

I think that, and then maybe just talk about our great conclusions.


SPEAKER_03:
yeah i'll just um go to the the participant single source of truth so if you're in this cohort you know this document if you're not in this cohort then this is the kind of document but a different one that you'll get when you're in the cohort and i'm going to scroll down to the bottom to after the weekend

and in that page in the page you'll see a feedback form and so you can fill out this feedback form and then just hit submit when you're done and it would be super super helpful and a huge leverage point for something that you saw

that could be improved because this is like your way that the organizers are going to get what you're thinking.

And we do curate and compile all the different feedback that people send us privately and everything from this form.

And we compile that and that's going to be basically presented as like a summary in about

three weeks when the next organizing cycle begins.

And speaking of organizing, if anybody wants to be an organizer or a facilitator or connect us with one at any of the upcoming events, this very short form just asks for your name and your Keybase username and your email.

and then whether you're interested in being an organizer or a facilitator at what event and this is something where you can select multiple events so that you can really curate like a long-term experience with facilitation or develop in your organizing and we can talk more at complexityweekend gmail.com if you have any questions about like what the participation entails but it's also written

here some of the details are provided here as well so those are two of the ways that at the cw level you can stay in the game and really contribute seriously would be providing the feedback here and also being involved as an organizer or a facilitator and also all these other ways that people participate um where should i go to sean


SPEAKER_06:
I don't know.

I mean, I think that might be a good spot.

I feel like, uh, it was just, it was an awesome weekend.

It's always the best time.

I love the community.

I love all the interactions.

I just, I learn so much every weekend.

Um, I'm excited for the after party.

So yeah, definitely go to that little bit lead atrium.

Hey Vienna, do you have any parting thoughts to the cohort or Jen?


SPEAKER_04:
You know, it's always exciting and it's always new.

And I love the teams that were able to talk to us.

I know one of the participants and I were beginning to talk about we didn't quite get to team formation stage.

But I'm hoping that that's something that will happen at a future event.

Sean, you know who I'm talking about, right?

because I know you spoke to him too, is we were all beginning to think about, oh, we're getting older and we're going to have to think about retirement.

I mean, I know this doesn't reflect everybody in the Complexity Weekend, but some of us are getting older and thinking about

in the current financial markets, what does retirement look like in intentional communities?

And Sean was bringing up like, hey, have you thought about DAOs in terms of potential communities?

So we've got some research that we've got going on and I wanna see if we can bring this back and really form a robust team maybe in the fall.

So, cause I think it's a problem that a lot of people have been facing and has global implications.

So could be fun.

I don't know.

It's always amazing to hear what people do with what Complexity Weekend offers and then what comes out of it.

The fruiting bodies are just, you know, in terms of the teams and just what people take away from personal relationships is always amazing to me.


SPEAKER_03:
I'm walking around the gather space where the after party will be.

So if you're watching this stream, it's in the YouTube live chat.

After Party will be in the atrium and go check out that link.

Just jump on in and come hang out with us and let's talk more.

So everyone who participated and all the roles, organizer, facilitator, participant, supporter, associate, it happened.

It's in the book.

It's in the block.

And on to the next After Party, on to the next Heartbeat and Weekend.

So thanks again, everybody.

I hope to see you participating in the future.

Bye.


SPEAKER_04:
Nice meeting everyone!

I want to meet everybody I didn't.

See you soon!

Yay!


SPEAKER_09:
Yay!