SPEAKER_00:
Alright, hey guys, so this is about, just about, oh, what happened?

This is framework for OMG money around funding.

innovations or like new just new stuff funding new um things so this is um i have a set of symbols from the book that i wrote methodology to teach accounting and finance easy

Easy accounting and finance introduction.

And I'm going to use some of those to present this framework to see whether it would be of use.

This is a new one.

I just kind of like made it up.

uh well at least wrote it down earlier and so this is the cash symbol it's supposed to be a 3d coin um and so i'm going to introduce you to a few of the players of the game i guess so this is our um the recipient of our gift so this is the customer and they might be paying customers or not but they benefit from the value of our solutions

And then these two folks here, this is an equity investor and this is a debt investor.

A little layer of nuance is that I also classify grantmakers as a customer because they, let's separate it, just kind of distinguish between a grantmaker who is after impact

and a customer who is using the good or service so the value that we're providing of our solution takes rides in a vehicle and so that's that so they use the the thing that we're making

And these guys don't use it, but they get super happy when these guys use it and when there's just value that comes out of that So they're happy But they have financial resource these folks have financial resource and they wanted an exchange for share and these folks

Sorry, that's like a little coin.

Have financial resource and they just want to be paid back with a little bit more.

And with lower risk and these folks a lot more.

Hopefully, but they know that they can get like... Oh, I'm in an awkward situation now.

Nothing.

So these folks, what they want in return is just for these folks to be happy.

um so this is kind of a simplistic but um way of looking at it uh but it'll work for now um and then we have our workers so the teams um i have two notations here but they're they're a little bit

maybe early for this stage, but so maybe we can just talk about this person is just simply the worker.

So literally putting their breath and time and energy into coming up with the value, the solution.

And this simply means that there is a formal entity and this is an employee of that formal entity.

So we might just kind of put that aside for now.

So, these are our teams, basically, and the teams are kind of like, I don't know, I haven't made a symbol for teams yet, so if you want to make it connected to the notion of worker...

open to ideas and stuff so given this cast of characters and we're looking at funding for innovations i'm going to introduce everybody loves a matrix or at least two axes so this one

is the, um, for the x-axis, um, and how these folks feel.

And I'll just add that.

So they've got, they've got the financial resource.

How these folks feel about money.

So, um, and funding new things, um, specifically.

So they're like, money?

I'm nervous-er about it.

Then you take it all the way to the other end.

And they're like, money?

Yeehaw!

So as you can probably tell, it's the risk profile and whether they've been doing this a lot or not.

And then here on the y-axis is the teams and their solutions.

And so I'll just characterize it by...

It's simple, let me tell you.

So it's pretty straightforward.

The path is relatively clear as to how they're going to test this out, etc, etc.

And then you go all the way up to the top and they're like, ah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.

It's kind of complicated.

And bear in mind, our teams might get it themselves and we might get it ourselves in the community, but their target, well, their audience, the audience of their talk in whatever format it comes are these folks.

So they, in my experience, they just don't speak the same language, especially, well, I'm looking at the context of climate innovations, for example,

And then just speaking money.

So that's very simplistic, but there we have it.

We've got, we've got our, that came from a mug.

I'm just using what I have to hand.

So that's our access.

So you've got the folks who have the thing that is needed to join the team.

And then I've got a few pieces here.

And so I'll just jump right into it and then do a first plot.

So for the folks, and this is what I've seen in my experience at Climate Kick, for the folks who have money, and this is a grant making, it's a grant manager, it was government funded.

um the idea is uh to use cups so when i talk about cash when we talk about cash and we talk about money it's liquid or well it's water right so it's just sorry those are supposed to be h2o this is not very well drawn but anyway

so it's water and it's liquid so I've used containers and this is a little cup and so for something that's simple where funders are more nervous it's good to have a little cup of liquidity and then maybe as they get less nervous you can

you know do another little cup um and then as you know they're starting to experience it could be like a bigger glass um that kind of thing and then um for the folks for the investors who are a little more risk they have higher risk appetite

um, for something that's more straightforward in this world, um, that's not so complicated to explain or has less complexity involved in the solution itself.

Um, maybe it's a bucket, but it's definitely something rigid.

So these are, these are just pieces.

I've put them here arbitrarily, um, but it might be helpful in sort of conversations.

And then here's where, um,

Here's where it's getting, the solution itself is complex to communicate to the folks with funding, especially if it's something new.

Because if it's too easy, if it's really easy to understand, like I used to say at Climate Kick, we might not be doing, oh, I can't refer to that.

or we might not be doing um something that's fun and new um if everyone could understand us so that's kind of like a sign of okay this is cool we're doing something good here um but this piece is a cup but like a pretend one so it's drawn onto a like a card or playing card or piece of paper so this is this can represent like digital or analog things

So this is where it might be a game or an exercise of using a D app or cryptocurrency or token or like literal figures like we could take little figures and then just use that to test sort of early stage things out for the more nervous folks.

But these nervous folks would have to be well versed in the digital.

If you're going to use crypto, for example, because then otherwise you have another layer of complexity from their perspective to to explain.

It all comes down to, I guess, in this sense, for the teams, for our community, these folks are a customer of our story, let's say.

And then finally, and this is my favorite space to play, so I know...

I mean, I say that, but I forget, but I might know more folks in this space, in that space, maybe in that space.

Fewer here who I can introduce folks to potentially, but where I'm playing is in the space of is really emergent.

It's really like fun and new.

And the

the money that I'm trying to raise for a pool or pot or fund, um, format structurally to be, um, determined is flexible.

It's a bladder.

I know it looks like a pear that's got like fairies in it that are kicking.

I don't know.

Um, that has like a little spout.

So there is this just one fat pot of money that, um,

It's not even a pot.

I just said it's a bladder that can be dispensed as and when it's needed.

And then when it's run out, then it's there's no more.

There's no more hydration to provide.

But this requires full well, it's not just a high risk appetite.

It's really trust.

and it's full trust in the worker, um, it's themselves and the teams, um, and the, uh, just the whole community, um, surrounding this.

So let, yeah, let's just make it a sun.

Just be, well, okay.

Anywho, so this is where I'm playing with the Steamship group where we've been playing in Love is Unlimited is really that trust in

trust in the actual human groups of humans working on the particular thing and as I mentioned is hashtag pay the people so not paying the people is like having a business built on quantum computers and then not spending money on maintaining and developing the computers or like

you know, getting and cleaning the data sets to feed into the models and stuff.

So hashtag pay the people.

And so this is just, it's flexible.

It's real money in this case, in the place that I'm playing, but it could be digital as well inside.

So I can just take this beauty of little pieces.

It could be like,

um cash or um not cash fiat whatever it might be um or it could be pure energy it could be somebody's time um so all of this can be framed as well as like um payments and kind but that would be kind of like the next step so that's

That's that.

So to sum up, the two simple dimensions that capture a world of information is just the funders or the customer's comfort level with parting with their money and the teams to which they part them.

And then

From the perspective, well, I guess with the worker being the teams, being the storytellers, the accountants, storytellers, and the funders being the audience, how well can they convey this message?

their idea, the solution, the thing that needs to be tested moving forward.

And I think there would be there's a there's a caveat.

coming up or a couple of points to note one is you might you are still talking to people here and the different conversations just be mindful of how homogeneous the group is

For example, do you say homogenous or homogeneous?

Or how diverse they are?

This is clearly a very badly drawn pie chart.

And then taking into account that that effectively puts you kind of higher here if you've got a more diverse group of money holders.

who who want to do good they really really do um so i've i i know really good-hearted folks um i know people who are i guess less focused but the world is moving towards integrating as you all know like impact investing and stuff like that so um that i think is it

And so I'll just leave you with the picture of a previous version, my outtake of digital currency.

So I ended up going with this, but then I tried to do a pixelated gather space type thing and I couldn't do it.

Forgive the voice, I'm just hosting a cold virus in my body system resort.

So yeah, let me know what you think of this video.

sort of framework and concept and whether you might think it's something worth, yeah.

What do you think?