SPEAKER_00:
Okay, I think we are live.

Welcome everyone to Synergetics stream number 14.

It is December 12th, 2021.

Today in Synergetics stream number 14, the spirit is summarized as usual by three words.

And those three words are striving, effectic, and totophony.

Effectic, the definition is from Wikipedia, ancient Greek, potentially describes three interrelated concepts.

One, a type of skeptic.

Two, the practice of a type of skepticism.

Or three, the general state of being given to suspense of judgment.

And tetophony means repetition of the same sound.

And in Synergetics, we definitely do a lot of tetophony.

We're always talking about tets and there's a bunch of other words and sounds that we repeat a bunch of times.

So that's the spirit for today.

Let me just fix the captioning, make sure that everything looks good on the stream.

So while we're getting started though,

um thanks for joining and if you're watching live please feel free to add any questions or comments in the live chat synergetics is participatory so please do reach out and please feel free to have fun when you are watching synergetics and learning about this fun area

Today in Synergetics 14, we're going to go over the key memes and themes as we usually do.

And then we will be talking about memes and mnemonics, memory devices for XYZ and IVM, isotropic vector matrix.

We'll then go to Synergetics section 402, tetrahedron as system.

Then section 1230, Scheherazade numbers.

So first the key memes and themes.

Let me, I'm still not seeing the captions update.

So I'm just going to do one more change here.

Cloud captioning.

It's cool when it works and it doesn't work when it doesn't work.

All right.

I think that's better.

There we go.

Make the QR code big.

All right.

Synergetics is relational, multi-scale, and systems thinking.

It's connected to our accessible experience, and it doesn't have infinitesimals or points, lines, and planes, at least in the way that you'll learn about them outside of Synergetics.

In Synergetics, we're framing design as an anticipatory cybernetic science and a sort of ongoing interrogative process.

Tensegrity is to synergetics as engineering is to physics.

And tensegrity is tension and compression, structural integrity through tension and compression and balance.

Synergetics is the geometry of thinking.

And that's a lot like the relationship between engineering and physics, where engineering is like the applied project-based version of physics, and physics often does go off into math or metaphysics or geometry.

One of the big ideas in synergetics is that space has a shape.

When you pack balls together, they don't just go any which way.

They minimize their free energy and they fall into a certain arrangement.

What shape is that?

And wouldn't we want to use that as our coordinate system?

Another big idea is that structure is a pattern and that pattern integrity can be static or dynamic.

talk about universe as the total scenario we don't need to say the universe it's the universe that's why it's uni and system is any sub system systems always have shape that's what we're going to be talking about in tetrahedron as system

And we think 4D.

4D is kind of like four dimensional.

It can refer to the four dimensions of an extended Euclideanism as shown here, kind of a geometric interpretation.

4D can refer to space and time.

It can also refer to this uniquely synergetics way of seeing 4D and just thinking about that as our mnemonic, our memory key to all these other ways of 4D

that are always happening at the same time.

Let's talk about the things that will integrate.

So not much has changed here.

What are our preferences and expectations for learning and applying synergetics?

How is synergetics connected to these other areas like free energy principle and active inference and Haken's synergetics and the constructal law?

How can we participate in modern synergetics and what does the future of computational synergetics look like?

So there's all kinds of cool links and things that we'll explore.

But let's jump right in to the memes and mnemonics for XYZ and IVM.

this is going to be framed in a way like a hegelian dialectic problem reaction solution thesis antithesis synthesis so xyz this is the coordinate system that many people are familiar with you have three orthogonal axes the x the y and the z axis and they're all at 90 degree perpendicular relationships to each other and the shape that is very natural

the xyz system of coordination is the cube and the cube as we all have learned has an edge length of one and a volume of one so the surface area of that square on the side is one like one times one is one and then one cubed is one so the cube has an edge length of one and a volume of one

There's also some equations for volume within the XYZ system.

So what's cool about the XYZ system?

Let's give the devil its due.

It's all space filling by itself, the cube is.

What's not cool about XYZ?

Well, there's a ton that's not cool actually, but just to list two, the first is that there's no structural stability.

There needs to be this implicit or explicit triangulation.

Like if you look into your rectangular building, you'll find these cross bracings that are making triangles.

So we need to almost subdivide the sides into triangles to provide structural stability because the triangle is the minimum shape.

Another thing that's not cool is the edge of the cube is 1.

And that makes you think that everything's going to be nice and clean.

But then it turns out that actually the diagonal is square root of 2, and that pretty much every shape is either going to have an irrational volume or be basically pixelated.

So we get a lot of clean numbers and integers if we wanted to build something that's a perfect rectangle.

But then once we step outside the rectangle, we find that there's a lot of irrational numbers and things that we just can't compute that well.

What's the reaction?

Synergetics.

In synergetics, we're going to prioritize and centralize a tetrahedron, this four-sided shape.

Here's my desk tet made by Trevor, a brass tetrahedra.

we're not just going to highlight the centrality of the tetrahedra, we're going to actually say that it has an edge length of one and a volume of one.

which requires some math and some correction terms relative to X, Y, Z, but we're gonna talk about that soon.

So what's cool about that?

Well, the tetrahedra is the minimum space including polyhedra.

So as far as starting places go, it makes sense to do a tet instead of a cube.

And also it's omni-triangulated.

It's the minimum structural stable unit.

So synergetics is pretty cool.

And then the synthesis, the solution, is the isotropic vector matrix.

What's cool about the IVM?

Well, it's all space filling.

The tetrahedra themselves are not space filling.

They don't take up all space.

If you just concatenate a bunch of tetrahedra next to each other, regular tetrahedra.

And one of the core memes is that from the isotropic vector matrix, you can get cubes, but you'll never get the IVM or tetrahedra from cubes.

So what is the IVM?

The IVM is the isotropic vector matrix, and there's a ton of places you can go to learn about this.

And this is the core image.

Here we have a cube, and inscribed inside of the cube is a regular tetrahedra.

The diagonal of the cube, the edge of the tet, is given a length of 1.

So that might be called square root of 2 in the XYZ system.

But we're going to go ahead and call that edge 1.

So it's kind of like a linear scaling factor.

It turns out that when we call that edge one, which is a nice rational number, we get root two over two as the length of the side of the cube, which is fine.

It's just another shape, it's pretty simple, and it's a cool way to measure the sides of a cube.

How do we get from the vector equilibrium to an all-space filler?

So the vector equilibrium, and I'm quoting here from the synergetic latticefieldtheory.org.

Synergetic's vector equilibrium illustrates its construction from eight tetrahedra situated around a common central point.

Each tetrahedron contributes three internal edges or vectors and an additional three external edges, because tetrahedra have six edges, creating a total of 24 internal or radial unit edge vectors and 24 external circumferential unit edge vectors.

And that's sometimes shown with more of a square focus, and sometimes it's shown indented.

The isotropic vector matrix, so like Maya or the matrix, the isotropic vector matrix, IVM, is defined by the three-dimensional honeycomb lattice created by a set of tetrahedron and octahedron stacked together to fill space.

So tets alone are not all space fillers, but tets and octs are co-space fillers.

The left figure shows a small set of two layers of tetrahedrons stacked together.

This stacking of tetrahedrons includes empty pyramid-shaped regions between the tetrahedron.

The right figure shows a set of octahedrons nested into some of these empty pyramid-shaped regions in the left figure.

This combined stacking of tetrahedrons and octahedrons can be extended indefinitely to span arbitrary large spatial extents.

So just like X, Y, and Z go off in all directions, the IVM is going to go off in all directions.

It's kind of like R...

field that we're doing synergetics in so sometimes we want to find equivalences back to minecraft back to xyz but this is like our field and it also turns out that this has really nice parallels which we'll explore later with the close packing of spheres

Here is from Kirby Earners, 4dsolutions.net, talking about isotropic vector matrices.

So, crystallography, as traditionally communicated, is inevitably imbued with a strong European bias in favor of making everything cubical or cube referenced.

Ergo, the synergetics approach to closest packing of unit radius spheres as concentric layerings of 10F squared plus two spheres around a nuclear sphere, we're going to come back to that, in a cuboctahedral conformation is rarely found in 1900s crystallography books.

Rather, we read about the face-centered cubic lattice, which amounts to the same thing.

So here I did a little dot-gif anatomy, dot-gif dissection, and...

we can see how this vector equilibrium is going to be superimposed with another vector equilibrium, and that's going to result in a lattice that's cubic.

So let's remember, close packing of spheres, 12 of them, around a center sphere.

We get like some triangles, and then we also get some squares.

So here's the square side, and here's the triangle side.

Triangle side, square side.

So D shows this center atom, let's call it, and then the 12 close-packed spheres.

And what's great about this is that every edge length is the same.

So it's kind of like the perfect like ohm sound of geometry, the vector equilibrium.

That's why it's the VE.

So we take D, the VE, and then we superimpose an inverted VE.

We get this C plus D. This is a GIF.

By the way, on Kirby's site, it's a GIF.

And from C plus D, in a way that's really similar to how the tetrahedra, one of them inscribed half of the points of a cube, but then a second tetrahedra inscribes the other four points of the cube.

The two vector equilibria inscribe all of the points that you need for a cubic lattice.

So in the graphic below, which is decomposed here, we see that the isotropic vector matrices C plus D combine to form a simple cubic lattice.

So if no other memes are distilled from this, just know that from the vector equilibrium and the IVM, you get the cubic lattice.

But from the cubic lattice, you're always going to be in pixelated Minecraft world where shapes have irrational volumes.

So anytime someone's like, but what about this cool feature of the cubic lattice?

Just go, great, we have that.

We just do more and we do different.

Here's another awesome recent development from Kirby at 4D Solutions, and it relates to finding the volume of a tetrahedron.

So check out 4D Solutions School of Tomorrow Volume Talk, the Python notebook, if you want to learn more and interact with this, but it's pretty cool stuff.

two approaches are provided the pdf and the gdg those are two people's names provided for calculating the volume of a tetrahedron and so basically you specify the six edge lengths which uniquely specify except for chirality which tetrahedron you're talking about and then this is a function the pdf and the gdg gdj that define the volume of that

So just like we have like height times width times length for a cube, we have a different one that takes six arguments for finding the volume of a tetrahedron.

And if we put in all ones here in the PDF, we get a volume of 0.11.

If we put in all ones into the GDJ, we get 1.0.

So that's the one that we want to go with, right?

Because we know that we have an edge length of one and a volume of one in synergetics.

How could these be so different?

the GDJ returns a volume in tetravolumes instead of in terms of unit cubes, which have a unit volume of 3.

In addition, its unit edges are twice as long, being in sphere diameter versus radii.

So qualitatively, this is related to what Bucky said, unity is plural and at minimum 2.

But quantitatively, it's related to the idea that if we have the edge length of 1,

and then we think about that one as the radius of a sphere, then the cube has like an edge length of two.

So if you imagine a sphere at each vertex of the cube or a sphere at each vertex of the tetrahedra, like four closely packed oranges, then we want to give this a value of one.

That's like the smallest possible integer.

And so also it's cool because it's like R and then the YAH from Russian.

and that is the diameter of two.

So the distance between the two vertices is actually two for kissing spheres.

And it turns out that if you take the PDF of two, so that's moving it from an edge length of one to two, and then multiply it by the sin three constant, you get a tetra volume of one.

So the PDF is in the XYZ coordination system, but

by just making the edge length two and then multiplying it by the sin three, which is a constant variable, then you get that one back.

So what is sin three?

SYN3 is defined here very interestingly as the ratio of the GDJ of an all one TET divided by the PDF XYZ coordination system of all two sided TET.

So the sin 3 is the synergetics constant.

It's 1.06.

And that's kind of like a scaling factor by which we get between cube volumes and tet volumes.

But we also need to mind the difference between edge length of 1 and a diameter of 2.

Let's keep learning about the IVM.

So this is on the TrimTab mailing list.

Dick Fischbeck wrote, If I didn't post it before, here it is again for posterity.

AKA Kirby's, I'm already looking at the TrimTab archives itself as Lionel's notebook.

Kind of like an archival resource.

And these are some of the greatest hits of humanity.

Some of these equations.

We have Euler in 1700s, finding out about the triangular numbers.

We have Fuller in the mid 1900s, finding out about the relationships of the vertices and the tet volumes of shapes of different frequency.

We're going to come back to that.

And then in 2021, I guess you could say kind of a breakthrough year for Fischbeck at all, finding some new relationships between the number of vertices and triangles and tetrahedra in shapes.

And so here's another way of kind of spinning around that IVM, talking about it.

The isotropic vector matrix is a lattice of rods connecting the center of spheres of equal radius.

Every sphere is a nucleus surrounded by 12 other in a cuboctahedral conformation.

It's not the only option.

The rods or stress vectors define tetrahedral and octahedral voids of volume one and four, respectively.

The IVM is also known as the octet truss.

oct octahedra tetrahedra and is quite widely used in architecture and engineering as a uniform dispersion of points in space the ivm models in ideal gas freeze frame to define average molecular positions as per avogadro's law so here's some cool images of packed spheres and about the way that we get the close packing of spears and the cubic geometry that arises

Let's turn to Latus and Preyson's blog and just look at a few cool pieces of information.

So we're talking in this section about XYZ and IVM, about how they're similar, how they're different, how we get the XYZ from IVM, but not vice versa.

So here is a dodecahedron with 20 vertices and an icosahedron with 20 faces, which are kind of duels of each other.

And these two shapes are almost hiding these three orthogonal XYZ planes.

So everything good that you can say about XYZ, you get that from the planes inscribed within the dodecahedron and icosahedron as its dual.

And this blog post is pretty interesting because it has a big list, not an exhaustive list, of 20-fold planes.

paths.

20 popping up all over the place.

Insights, strategies, methods, guidelines, principles, rules, 20 rules that everyone can live by, 20 rules for writers and writing, 20 rules of knowledge formalization.

So this 20 number comes up all the time.

And that's kind of our task to find the meaning of that.

Here are some other closed shapes and some similarities so that we can use these as mnemonics just to kind of hold in mind.

So here's that dodecahedron with 20 vertices with the all pentagons.

And here's another all pentagon shape.

It's a soccer, a football, I guess, as the non-Americans call it.

And then there's C60, Buckminster Fullerene, the Buckyball.

And that can be seen as an example of tensegrity architecture where tension and compression are in balance.

Here, some more cool images from the blog post.

Here is a way that we can use the number seven, which is gonna come back up.

Here's a cuboctahedron and the sides have the questions, who, what, why, where, when, how, et cetera.

And then shapes are provided as mnemonics or kind of investigation devices for exploring those different questions.

it's a geometric way to think about something that doesn't necessarily have an endogenous geometry and then there's one more look at that here's those seven questions where how why when who which what where how why who when which what and those can be rotated around

And they can also be replaced with other sets of seven.

So there's seven axes of symmetry, which are being related to the seven questions, but that can be also connected to the seven axes of bias and the seven pairs of opposites.

So personal and impersonal, for example, feeling and thinking.

It's not exhaustive, but it's a way to use geometry as a mnemonic as we're navigating these interesting landscapes of thought.

That's kind of what synergetics is about.

It's the geometry of thinking.

In another latest impressions.org post, the 20 amino acids, so we talked about 20 on the previous page, there's 20 common or base amino acids and

What does that have to do with anything?

Well, we can think about those two duals, the 20 vertex and the 20 face shape, the dodecahedron and the icosahedron, and then map those onto the codon table and the amino acids, as well as to other things where there's 20 of them, like the G20, the big economy groups of countries.

So this just gets us used to thinking not in terms of a list or a grid, which is kind of that open-ended XYZ mentality, but rather thinking on topologically closed surfaces.

Here's a really nice graphic, and I wish it were interactive and tied with computational ontology and could do so much more, but it's the tetrahedron right at the center.

The tetrahedron is the minimum polyhedra.

So in this map of polyhedra, it makes sense that it would be like right in the middle.

And then there's a few ways that we can explore this image.

So here's one of them.

Here's where the shapes, the names of them have been removed.

So instead of calling the 32 facet, 90 edge and 60 vertex shape, the truncated icosahedron, we can just call that one, the 182, the two times seven times 13 here and see some other different relationships between the shapes.

And here's another way that you can kind of slice that.

Now the names are back and we can think about these paths that connect through the tet right in the middle.

So we have this kind of one world up here with the cuboctahedron, the vector equilibrium, as well as a bunch of other shapes, and then another world down on the bottom.

And then it kind of comes through the tetrahedron.

That's like our meeting point in the middle.

So cool geometry.

And then one last thing here from the latest impressions on the theme of mnemonics.

So here is the four platonic polyhedra configured around a tetrahedron.

So it's just a memory device.

It's not saying this is some special significant shape.

And then on the right is the indication of the 12 Archimedean polyhedra, the truncated shapes configured around truncated polyhedron.

truncated tetrahedron, sorry.

So that's kind of just an interesting way that we can, again, thinking in terms of closed topological geometric spaces, rather than just sort of lists or grids.

And then there's the close packing, which we're going to be exploring a lot.

The packed spheres make an icosahedron, and then they can be packed and unpacked.

And then just to

highlight one of those lists of 20 that are in the blog.

Here are the 20 hindrances according to Buddhism.

Belligerence, resentment, concealment, spite, jealousy, miserliness, deceit, dissimulation, haughtiness, harmfulness, non-shame, non-embarrassment,

lethargy, excitement, non-faith, laziness, non-conscientiousness, forgetfulness, non-interrospection, and distraction.

So just kind of some cool things to think about when we're learning synergetics.

Let's jump into the text, section 402, tetrahedron as system, 402.1.

The tetrahedron as a real system consists of one concave tetrahedron and a second convex tetrahedron plus a third tetrahedron for all the universe outside the system as tetrahedron and a fourth tetrahedron complementary accounting for all universe inside the system as tetrahedron.

All the angles are the same on the inside as on the outside.

So first it's interesting that

the is used in relationship to universe but this is kind of like taking tet thinking to the extreme where we're going to think about the closed tetrahedron that's kind of the one you hold in your hand but it's also carving another tetrahedra out from the rest of universe

And here's the more simple definition.

A tetrahedron is a triangular faceted polyhedron of four faces.

It is unique as a system for it is the minimum possible system.

So that's sort of the go-to meme for why should we be tet-centric?

Because it's the minimum system.

403, stable and unstable systems.

There are stable systems and unstable systems.

For a discussion of stable and unstable structures, see section 608, stability, necklace.

So just to recall, the idea here was that we were going to be stringing these beads that are kind of like unit length around a necklace, a piece of string.

And we find which systems are stable and which ones are not stable.

Well, a line is not stable.

It kind of waves around.

You can make all kinds of other systems that still have degrees of freedom in their movement, but the Tet is where you can take those six beads and close them and it becomes stable.

Conceptuality.

Unstable systems are conceptual as momentary positional relationships of unstructured component-event aggregates.

For example, among the stars comprising the Big Dipper in Ursa Major, the second and third stars in the Dipper's handle are respectively 100 and 200 light years away from Earth.

though seemingly to us in the same plane are not also and they are both moving in opposite directions and in due course they will no longer seem to be in the same constellation in the same way four airplanes flying in different directions may be within visible range of one another but are far too remote for mass into attraction to become critical and pull them into one another

Stable systems are conceptual as structured, which means componentally inter-triangulated, critical proximity, inter-relevant, coordinate, constellar events aggregates.

So here is just for those who need a reminder.

Here's the big dipper.

And here's the big and the little dipper next to each other.

And this idea of synchronous events and simultaneity of events plays out in the awesome book by Bucky, Tetra Scroll, Goldilocks and Three Bears, which is a children's story.

And it's available in book form, but it actually was created in this foldable scroll.

So you could kind of like unfold it and then the scroll would unroll.

What is being said about the Big Dipper?

So this is kind of like saying, we've all heard people say, well, the stars, we don't know

what the current status of the star is.

We're getting starlight from so many years ago, but that light is converging on the observer as the center at that one moment.

So that's kind of one of the differences between the XYZ and the IVM.

In the IVM, we really do have this point in the center where things can converge upon.

And then from the point of view of that point,

minimum systems so at minimum three other systems where the observer is the fourth point is like viewing out and those systems could be very far away they could be coming towards each other going apart but that's the conceptual system three generalized principles

If the only momentary and optically illusory system consideration proves to be unstable, it does not manifest generalized principle.

If systems are stable, they inherent in and accommodate all generalized principles.

So this is kind of an interesting idea that stable systems are the most aligned with the generalized principles, say the minimization of free energy or the reduction of distance between the spheres, whereas unstable systems transiently or in a momentary way can be positioned

in a less structured way.

So the generalized principles are like the structuring principles, but things can be far from equilibrium transiently.

How does this relate to close packing of rots?

So section 412, 1.

Just as six balls may be closest packed around a nuclear ball in a plane, six rods or wires may be closest packed around a nuclear rod or wire in a cluster.

When the seven wires are thus compacted in a parallel bunch, they may be twisted to form a cable of hexagonal cross-section, with a nuclear wire surrounded by the other six.

hexagonal pattern of cross section persists as complete additional layers are symmetrically added to the cluster these progressive symmetrical surroundments constitute circumferentially finite integrities in universal geometry so here is table figure 412.01 so here's like one big steel rod

And then the second column is like that one rod, you shrink it down and then you pack six around it.

So it would still fit in the same coating.

And then you shrink that one down and then you add one more shell.

So this is called frequency in Synergetics.

And it just refers to layering one more layer of balls around a given point.

So this is kind of looking at within one plane, we're just making cables that are the same diameter, but then they have more and more and more thinner and thinner and thinner pieces.

Surface tension capability.

We know by conclusive experiments in measuring that the progressive subdivision of a given metal fiber into a plurality of approximately parallel fibers provides tensile behavior capabilities of the smaller fibers at increased magnitudes, up to hundreds and thousands fold that of the unit solid

metal section this is because the increased surface to mass ratio and because all high tensile capability is provided by the work hardening of surfaces this is because surface atoms are pressed into closer proximity to one another by the drawing tool through which the rod and the wire are processed so

First point is about compression and tension, and the second one is about having increasingly threaded tensile elements.

So what is the way that elevators work?

Do they have a big pedestal that pushes them up from the bottom and then lowers if you want to go down?

Well, no.

It turns out that having a big column of metal that could support an elevator would be...

very challenging task and it would be suboptimal for a few reasons but it also would have to be much more than let's just say one inch whereas a one inch metal cable can absolutely hold up an elevator so that's the power of tension versus compression and that's what tensegrity is about is recognizing the complementary nature of

tension and compressional forces in structural integrity.

And so these are like finer and finer weaves of tensile fibers.

And we get the tensile strength adding as we make it more and more packed, smaller and smaller fibers at higher and higher frequency.

And so having just one steel rod

has a given tensile strength but the tensile strength increases as we make smaller and smaller fibers and so here's kind of cool like and also it's funny because the the rods area it's given us 314.159 which some may recognize as the earlier numbers of pi but we don't have pi here just given as a number

Now we move from the packing of threads in a bundle to spheres in space.

So omnidirectional close packing.

In omnidirectional close packing of equal radius spheres around a nuclear sphere, 12 spheres will always symmetrically and intertangentially surround one sphere with each sphere tangent to its immediate neighbors.

We may then close pack another symmetrical layer of identical spheres around the original 13.

The spheres of this outer layer are tangent, are also tangent to all of their immediate neighbors.

The second layer totals 42 spheres.

If we apply a third layer of equiradius spheres, we find they too can pack symmetrically and tangentially.

The number of spheres in the third layer is 92.

Equiradius spheres closest packed around a nuclear sphere do not form a supersphere, as might be expected.

They form a symmetrical polyhedron of 14 faces, the vector equilibrium.

So we have the zero frequency triangle.

It's also very interesting.

When is it a one versus a zero frequency?

But it's given as zero frequency.

So this is just three balls on a table next to each other making one triangle from their center points.

This is the two frequency triangle.

So this is a lot like the rods, but instead of a hex expansion of frequency, we're making layers, we're adding more like Pascal's triangle.

So what happens when we take that into three dimensions?

when we close-pack spheres, not in the plane, but in space, we get omnidirectional close-pack spheres.

And their vertices, as we looked at a little bit earlier, trace out a vector equilibrium.

So here's those three that make up the triangle part here, and then here's the four that make up

the square side.

So this is what it means to say that space has a shape.

When you close pack spheres, you get vector equilibrium, cuboctahedron.

Whatever you want to call it, you get this shape.

You don't get some other shape.

So in whatever scenario we're in here, to whatever extent we understand it, this is the shape of space, or at least telling us something about it.

So 413.01.

omnidirectional closest packing around a nucleus, that's the vector equilibrium.

Triangles can be subdivided into greater and greater numbers of similar units.

The number of modular subdivisions along any edge can be referred to as the frequency of a given triangle.

The angle is the one that's independent of size, but frequency is the one that is very dependent on size.

In triangular grid, each vertex may be expanded to become a circle or sphere, showing the inherent relationship between close-packed spheres and triangulation.

The frequency of triangular arrays of spheres in the plane is determined by counting the number of intervals, a, rather than the number of spheres on a given edge.

So that's why we call this one a two frequency, but I'm not sure why we call that one a zero frequency rather than a one frequency.

In the case of concentric packings of spheres, packings or spheres around a nucleus, the frequency of a given system can either be the subdivision, edge subdivision, or the number of concentric shells or layers.

Concentric packings in the plane give rise to hexagonal arrays, just like the rope.

And B, omnidirectional closest packing of equal spheres around a nucleus gives rise to the vector equilibrium.

So that's kind of giving us a big hint about the shape of space.

what happens with triangles and with the VE.

If we add on more layers of equiradius spheres to the symmetrical polyhedron of 14 faces close packed around one sphere, we find that they always compact symmetrically and tangentially, and that this process of enclosure may seemingly be repeated indefinitely.

Each layer, however, is in itself a finite or complete and symmetrical embracement of spheres.

Each of these embracing layers of spheres constitutes a finite system.

Each layer always takes the 14-phase conformation and consists of eight triangular and six square faces.

Together with the layers they enclose and the original sphere center or nucleus, these symmetrically encompassing layers constitute a concentric finite system.

As additional layers are added, it is found that a symmetrical pattern of concentric systems repeats itself.

That is, the system of three layers around one sphere with 92 spheres in the outer layer begins all over again and repeats itself indefinitely with successively

successively enclosing layers in such a way that successive layers outside of the 92 sphere layer begin to penetrate the adjacent new nuclear systems.

We find that then only the concentric system of spheres within and including the layer of 92 are unique and individual systems.

We will pursue this concept of a finite system in universal geometry still further.

Section 418, et cetera.

in order to relate it to the significance of the 92 self-regenerative chemical elements.

So these are the elements up to uranium that are stable.

So that's kind of an interesting connection.

And this is really a key idea, that we're looking for finite systems only, finite integer systems, in this universal geometric layer.

Inside of the IVM, which we know that we can get from here,

we want to find finite systems.

So whatever the frequency is, whether it's the minimum, the zero frequency shape, just the single ball at the center, or whether we add a million frequencies, we're still going to have a finite system, so nucleus.

In closest packing of equiradius spheres, a nucleus by definition must be tangentially and symmetrically surrounded.

This means there must be a ball in every possible tangential and optically direct angular relationship to the nucleus.

This does not happen with the first layer of 12 balls or with the second layer of 42 balls.

Not until the third layer of 92 balls is added are all the tangentially, tangential spaces filled and all the optically direct angles of nuclear visibility intercepted.

We then realize a nucleus.

This is quite an interesting observation that when you have just this first layer, then there's still like an optical way that you can see the center.

And it turns out that even the second layer of 42 balls, you still have not added a blocker for all optical direct angles to nuclear visibility.

So it's actually this third layer that realizes a nucleus.

And I just wrote hashtag internal states related to active inference, whether that was somehow like, that's when you can truly have a Markov blanket, when you've really made this multi-layer

system that can actually have an insulated nucleus it will also be discovered that the third layer of 92 spheres contains eight new potential nuclei however these do not become realized nuclei until each has two more layers enveloping it one layer with a nucleus in it and two layers enclosing it three layers are unique to each nucleus this tells us that the nuclear group with 92 spheres in its outer

or third layer is the limit of unique closest packed symmetrical assemblages of unit wavelength and frequency.

These are nuclear symmetry systems.

It is characteristic of a nucleus that it has at least two surrounding layers in which there is no nucleus showing, i.e.

no potential.

In the third layer, however, eight potential nuclei show up, but they do not have their own three layers unique to realize them.

So the new nuclei are not yet realized, they are only potential.

So these are very much restatements of each other.

And it's getting at that same idea that as you start to add frequencies, add shells around the initial nucleus, when you get to the third one, you have created a nuclear symmetry system.

Then you've created some almost nuclei, but then you need another shell to realize those as true nuclear symmetry systems.

The nucleus ball is always two balls, one concave and one convex.

The two balls have a common center.

Hydrogen's one convex proton contains its own concave nucleus.

Concentric shell growth rates.

minimal most primitive concentric shell growth rates of equiradius closest packed symmetrical nucleated structures.

Out of all possible symmetrical polyhedra producible by closest packed spheres agglomerating, only the vector equilibrium accommodates a one-to-one arithmetical progression of frequency number and shell number developed by closest packed equiradius spheres around one nuclear sphere.

Only the vector equilibrium equanimity

Equanimity accommodates the symmetrical growth or contraction of a nucleus containing aggregate of closest packed equiradius spheres characterized by either even or odd numbers of concentric shells.

So for other shapes, if you added spheres around them, there might be a part where you needed to double up or it wouldn't perfectly fit.

But the vector equilibrium, we can grow by kind of crystallizing these shells around it just indefinitely.

Three, odd or even shell growth.

The hierarchy of progressive shell embracements of symmetrically closest packed spheres of the vector equilibrium is generated by a smooth arithmetic progression of both even and odd frequencies.

That is, each successively embracing layer of closest packed spheres is in exact frequency and shell number attunement.

Furthermore, additional embracing layers are accomplished with the least number of spheres per exact arithmetic progression of higher frequency.

Even number shell growth.

The tetrahedron, octahedron, cube, and rhombic dodecahedron are nuclear agglomerations generated by only even numbered frequencies.

Here's some of the equations that are given in synergetics with the nuclear symmetry systems and at what point they actually realize that third shell.

And then here's those equations

from Dick Fischbeck at all from earlier in the discussion.

And here we see like that 10F squared plus two, here's 10F squared plus two.

That's the number of shells as we go out.

So the zeroth shell and zero equals two.

That's brought up later in some of the numerology sections, but also that's sort of to make this equation work for even F equals zero.

And then we have sequences of numbers, and we can see that the vector equilibrium, it's like always working.

Every shell, we can continue with the same equation, but other shapes, they might work for a given shell, but then they don't work for all shells.

So maybe another time, especially if somebody could share more expertise, we could talk more about nuclear synergetics.

So that was the tetrahedron as a system.

We've talked about tetrahedron as minimal system and there's a few other sections on that and a few other synergetic streams and of course other work as well.

But that was a little bit of a different look at tetrahedron as a system because we talked about the tetrahedron as the stable system.

and as one that can be reached at from close packing, like four balls close packed make a tetrahedron, and then the vector equilibrium is sort of the core shape there.

So let's go to section 1230 for the Scheherazade numbers.

So this is gonna be a little bit at the end of Synergetics, very close to the end.

This is where it gets a little numerological, but this is kind of a fun sequence.

And also one, of course, just like they all are, that's really open to interpretation and exploration.

So if you have any thoughts on this, just leave them in the live chat or give a thought.

1230.10, prime number accommodation, integration of seven.

The Babylonians did not accommodate a prime number like 7 in their mathematics.

Plato had apparently been excited by this deficiency, so he multiplied 360 by 7 and obtained 2520.

And then, seeing that there were always positives and negatives, he multiplied 2520 by 2 and obtained 5040.

Plato apparently intuited the significance of the number 5040, but he did not say why he did.

I am sure he was trying to integrate seven to evolve a comprehensively rational circular dividend.

So in other words, how do we get the nice divisibility that we get, for example, with 360, but where's the seven?

So how do we reintegrate sevenness into our geometry systems?


UNKNOWN:
12.30.11.


SPEAKER_00:
H2O is a simple low number.

As both chemistry and quantum physics show, nature does all her associating and disassociating in whole rational numbers.

Humans accommodated the primes 1, 2, 3, and 5 in the decimal and duodecimal systems, but they left out 7.

After seven, the next two primes are 11 and 13.

Human superstition considers the number seven, 11, and 13 to be bad luck.

In playing dice, seven and 11 are crapping or dropout numbers, and 13 is awful.

But so long as the comprehensive cyclic dividend fails to contain prime numbers, which may occur in the data to be coped with, irrational numbers will build up or erode the processing numbers to produce irrational, ergo unnatural results.

must therefore realize that the tables of trigonometric functions include the first 15 primes 1 2 3 5 7 11 13 17 19 23 29 31 41 43 okay so a few themes here 7 11 and 13 which we're going to be talking a lot about have kind of been given a little bit of a um ignored role

potentially because the number systems that we have work well with a few other primes, but we didn't capture every prime.

And numbers that aren't prime, we can get at from primes.

That's like basically the definition.

And so we want to have an integer accounting system that can at least handle the primes up to 45.

And we'll see why 45 soon. 12.

We know seven times 11 is 77.

If we multiply 77 by 13, we get 1001.

Were there not 1001 tales of the Arabian Nights?

We find these numbers always involved with the mystical.

The number 1001 majors in the name of the storytelling done by Scheherazade to postpone her death in the 1001 Nights.

The number 1001 is a binomial reflection pattern.

One, zero, zero, one.

we take all those three kind of ignored numbers seven eleven thirteen and multiply them together we get a thousand and one s s r c d numbers if we multiply the first four primes we get thirty if we multiply thirty times seven eleven and thirteen we have thirty times a thousand and one or thirty thousand and thirty thirty thirty and we have used the first seven primes we can be intuitive

So the first four primes are how we get up to seven.

So that's like the first four primes, one, two, three, and five.

We can be intuitive about the eighth prime since the octave seems to be so important.

The eighth prime is 17.

And if we multiply 30,030 by 17, we arrive at a fantastically simple number, 510,510.

This is what I call an SSRCD number, which stands for Scheherazade Sublimely Rememberable Comprehensive Dividend.

As an example, we can readily remember the first eight primes factorial.

510, 510, exclamation point.

Factorial means successfully multiplied by themself.

Ergo, one times two times three times five times seven times 11 times 13 times 17 equals 510,510.

So this is a little bit of number play, but it turns out that by giving these special primes their due,

we can get these mnemonics for thinking about large numbers, and there's gonna be some big implications for that.

30, origin of the Scheherazade myth.

I think the Arabian priest mathematicians and their Indian ocean navigator ancestors knew the binomial effect of 1001 upon the first four prime numbers, one, two, three, and five.

and did indeed provide comprehensive dividend accommodation of all the permutative possibilities and all the storytelling, tailing, tallying, or computational systems of the octave system of integers.

So it's kind of cool to think about storytelling and telling tales and tallying.

These are all kind of coming together in, of course, the 1001 Arabian Nights.

The function of the grand visor to the ruler was that of mathematical wizard.

The whiz of wisdom and the wizard kept secrets to himself.

The mathematical navigational ability to go to faraway strange places where he alone knew there existed physical resources different from any of those occurring, quote, at home.

Then voyaging to places that only the navigator priest knew how to reach.

he was able to bring back guaranteed strange objects that were exhibited by the ruler to his people as miracles obviously producible only by the ruler who secretly and carefully guarded his visor's miraculous power of wisdom.

So very interesting.

It's kind of like in the world of sense-making, the sense-maker is the wizard.

In the world of navigation, the navigator is the wizard.

To guarantee their own security and advantage, the Mesopotamian mathematicians, who were the overland and overseas navigator priests, deliberately hid their knowledge, their mathematical tools and operational principles, such as the mathematical significance of 7 x 11 x 13 equals 1001, from both their rulers and the people.

They used psychology as well as outright lies, combining the bad luck myth of the three prime integers with the mysterious inclusiveness of the thousand and one knights.

The priests warned that bad luck would befall anyone caught using seven, elevens or thirteens.

Some calculations could only be done by the abacus or by positioning numbers.

With almost no one other than the high priest able to do any calculation, there was not much chance that anyone would discover the product of 7, 11, and 13 is 1001, but just in case, they developed the diverting myth of Scheherazade and her postponement of execution by her 1001 knights.

Okay, so we pivot from this idea of 1,001 as a special number.

That's kind of like the three missing primes.

7, 11, and 13 combined, multiplying to get 1,001.

Pivot from there back to the west.

So 1231.0, cosmic aliens.

Western world humans are no longer spontaneously cognizant of the Greek or Latin number prefixes like des or non or oct, nor are they able spontaneously to formulate in appropriate Latin or Greek terms the larger numbers spoken of by scientists nowadays only as powers of 10.

On the other hand, we are indeed familiar with the Anglo-American words one,

two, and three.

Wherefore, we may prefix these familiar designations with a constant ilion suffix, which we will now always equate with a set of three successive zeros.

So the ilion is kind of like our codon of zero, zero, zero.

So it's like a power of a thousand is an ilion.

2.

We used to call 1000 1000.

Oh, there I did it again.

Let me start again.

We used to call 1000 1000.

We will now call it 1 ilion.

Each additional set of three zeros is recognized by the prefixed number of such three zero sets.

1 million equals 2 ilion.

1 billion is 1 3 ilion.

This is always hyphenated to avoid confusion with this set of sub-billion enumerators, e.g.

2064 aliens.

The English identified aliens only with six zero additions, while the Americans used aliens for every three zeros, starting, however, only after 1000, overlooking its three zeros as common to all of them.

Both the English and American systems thus were forced to use awkward nomenclature by retaining the initial word thousand as belonging to a different concept in a historically earlier time.

Using our consistent alien nomenclature, we express the largest experientially conceivable measurement, which is the diameter of the thus far observed universe measured in diameters of the nucleus of the atom,

which measurement is a neat 312 14-illions.

So if we take the scope of the observed universe and then divide that by the nucleus of the atom, so that's a finite number by a finite number, we get this number 312 14-illions.

So 14 sets of three zeros.

Okay, so this is an interesting...

little excursion into numbering how do we talk about numbers do we talk about them in terms of powers of 10 or powers of 1000 and we'll just use ilion to refer to bumping up the power of a thousand by one so binomial symmetry of shahrazade numbers exponential powers of a thousand and one as with all binomials for example

a squared plus 2ab plus b squared the progressive powers of the 1001 scheherazade numbers produced by 7 times 11 times 13 the product of which multiplied by itself in successive stages produces a series of symmetrical reflection numbers they are not only sublimely rememberable but they resolve themselves into a symmetrical mirror pyramid array so

The binomial symmetry expands all of its multiples in both left and right directions in reflection balance.

Note that the exponential power to which the 1001 Scheherazade number is raised becomes the second whole integer from either end.

As with a plus b squared equals a squared plus 2ab plus b squared, the interior integers consist of expressions and products of the exponent's power.

So here's 1001 squared.

We get 1, 0, 0, 2 as kind of the middle point and then 0, 0, 1.

So it's a mirror around 2.

And so you can see that there are a lot of mirroring things happening with these numbers, which we'll explore more in the next few slides.

But also it's kind of cool, like looking down the pyramid, you get like 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and then 10.

Cancellation of leftward spillover.

In the pyramid array of 1001 Scheherazade numbers, we observe that due to the double symbol notation of the number 10, the symmetry seems to be altered by the introduction of the leftward accommodation of the two integers of 10 in a single integer position.

So we can look back at 1001 to the fifth power.

So here's 1001 to the fifth power.


UNKNOWN:
1005 010 010 005 001.


SPEAKER_00:
This number, it's going to get pulled out so that the one kind of comes above the line.

And then it's like a much better mirror.

So Bucky is suggesting 10 could be written vertically as like one and zero.

So it's kind of like carrying over when you do the multiplication and then, okay, now we've got a one up here, so let's put it, let's spill it over to the left.

What if you just leave it there?

Instead of 10, provided we always assumed the vertically superimposed integer was to be spilled into the addition of the next leftward column, for we build leftward positive and rightward negatively from our decimal 00.

The abacus with its wires and beads taught humans how to fill a column with figures, and thereafter to fill additional columns by convention to the left.

The Arabic numerals developed as symbols for the content of the columns.

They filled a column and then they emptied it.

But the cipher prevented them from using the column for any other notation.

And the excess, by convention, was moved over to the left.

This spillover can begin earlier or later depending on the modulus employed.

The spillover to the next column begins later when we are employing modulo 12 than when we are employing modulo 10.

To disembarrass the symmetry of the leftward spillover, the spillover number in the table has been written vertically.

So just like you'd imagine that you'd need to start carrying numbers, spilling them over very soon in base two, and in base 10, that's kind of the one that usually we're most familiar with.

We spill over when we get the one, when we get 10 in a given position.

But what if each position could hold 100?

Then you wouldn't have to spill over until you were at 100.

The table of the 10 successive powers of the 1001 Scheherazade numbers accidentally discloses a series of progressions.

One, in the extreme right-hand column, a progression of zeros.

Two, in the fourth column from the right, an arithmetical progression of n squared minus n over two, which we call a triangular.

And three, in the seventh column from the right, a tetrahedral progression.

So here's what that looks like.

This is raising n, 1001, to different powers.

So here in this fourth column, we get one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, and then spill over.

But we're going to leave that one up top.

In the fourth column from the right, so it's going to be this one.

So kind of at the millions place.

you have 1, 3, 6, 10, 15, 21, 28, 36, 45.

So by keeping that number up top, we reveal, I guess that's the accidental disclosure,

Whoops.

That's where you get the arithmetical progression.

And then in the seventh place, we get tetrahedral numbers.


UNKNOWN:
1, 4, 10, 20, 35, 56, 84, 120. 23.


SPEAKER_00:
The tetrahedron can be symmetrically or asymmetrically altered to accommodate the four unique planes that produce the fourth-dimensional accommodation of the vector equilibrium.

The symmetry disclosed here may very well be four-dimensional symmetry that we have simply expressed in columns in a plane.

The number 1001 looks exciting because we are very close to the binary system of the computers.

We remember that the Polynesians only counted to one and two.

The binary yes, no sequence looks so familiar.

The Scheherazade number has all the numbers you have in the binary system.

The one thousand and oneness keeps persisting throughout the table.

So here we keep on seeing like one and one, and then this thousand and oneness keeps on continuing once we've accounted for all these other special columns.

The number seven times 11 times 13 times 17 included in the symmetric dividend 510,510 may have an important function in atomic nucleation since it accommodates all the prime numbers involved in the successive periods.

So now let's look at some big numbers.

Okay.

So this is a little bit of a different, not a contradiction.

We'll call it a contrary because it's different than the previous claims.

that one is a prime.

Many mathematicians assume that one is not to be counted as a prime.

Thus, two, three, five, seven, 11, and 13 make a total of six effective primes that may be identified with the fundamental vector edges of the tetrahedron and the six axes of conglomeration of 12 uniradius spheres closest packed around one nuclear sphere and the fundamental topological abundance of universal lines that always consist of even sets of six.

So this is where it gets a little bit into the mnemonics because it's kind of like thinking, well, we can remember those first six primes other than one as being like corresponding, kind of like the latest impressions blog post that we looked at, corresponding to the edges of the tet and the six axes corresponding.

in the vector equilibrium.

So then this table 1232.30 gives a lot of Scheherazade reflection patterns.

So here's kind of a bunch of ways to take that same ordering of primes and just get a bunch of interesting findings.

So here's that 510, 510.

Here's the 1001.

We talked about 30,030, and there's just a bunch of other numbers.

They're kind of like fun ways to get big numbers.

What about the seven-illion Scheherazade number?

The seven-illion Scheherazade number includes the first seven primes, which are one times two times three times five times seven times 11 times 13 to the fifth power.

Then that is taken to the fifth power.

And then here's that large number provided here.

Cool number, Bucky.

In the first days of electromagnetics, scientists discovered fourth power energy relationships and Einstein began to find fifth power relationships having to do with gravity accommodating fourth and fifth powering.

The first seven primes factorial is a sublimely rememberable number.

It is a big number yet rememberable.

When nature gives us a number we can remember, she is putting us on notice and

that the cosmic communication circuits are open you are connected through to many sublime truths so even if you can only remember the number four or one that's okay you're still on notice though factored by seven prime numbers it is expressible entirely as various size increments of the three to the fifth power there is a four place overlapping of one

Three to the fifth power means five dimensionality triangulation, which means that five dimensional structuring as triangulation is structure.

We'll look at it in a second.

And then just 04.

When this number,

When it is substituted as a comprehensive dividend for 360 degrees and zero minutes or seconds to express cyclic unity in increments equal to one second of arc, while recalculating the tables of trigonometric functions, it is probable that many, if not most, and possibly all the function fractions will be expressible as whole rational numbers.

The use of

that long number as cyclic unity will eliminate much cumulative error of the present trigonomic function tables.

So let's look at that number.

Okay, so here is the number itself.

And now just as we kind of saw where we could take a number and then like vertically expand it, like here, this four is a four, but this four is expanded into a three and a one.

So that's like the leftward spillover of the one and then a three.

And so that big number, which was here, 24, 4, 2, 1, which doesn't immediately look like it has any mirrors or symmetry inside of it.

When you break it down this way, we can see there's like this 2, 4, 3, 2, 4, 3, which is three to the fifth, 243 is three to the fifth.

So you get three to the fifth twice.

That's like the nucleus.

Then there's two 12, 15s with the leftward spillover.

That's five times three to the fifth.

Then there's other two, four, threes on the shoulders.

So it's like, whoa, that's an interesting number.

And what Bucky's saying here is the degree of precision that makes sense for an engineer is like, if you could only talk in degrees, that's probably not enough to be precise.

And then you have like the hours and the minutes or the minutes and the seconds.

So if you can get, if you could have, like this is the trigonometric tables.

Even though we have calculators today that you could have like fractions of a second.

If you can get this, you'll be able to do a lot.

And he's saying, well, maybe this number is big enough so that all of these, so 360 times 60 times 60, that,

might fit rationally in here.

So we wouldn't even need fractions.

So that's the seven-illion Scheherazade number.

Let's look at the eight-illion Scheherazade number.

So the eight-illion Scheherazade number is given by this equation.

So it's one times two cubed times three to the eighth

times 5 to the 5th, times 7 to the 4th, times 11 to the 3rd, times 13 cubed to the 3rd power, sorry, times 17 squared, times 19, times 23, times 29, times 31.

And here's the big number.

It starts with a 1 and it ends with a 0.

The 8-Illian Scheherazade number accommodates all trigonometric functions, spherical and planar, when unity is 60 degrees.

Its halfway turnabout is 30 degrees.

It also accommodates the octave nine zero of the icosahedron's corner angles of 72 degrees, one half of which is 36 degrees.

Ergo, 31 is the greatest prime involved.

Here's the 31, which characterizes maximum spherical excess of the vector equilibrium's 60 degree-ness.

And then here is the nine ilion number.

And here is another...

number sequence with some other interesting relationships so like just like we had like two four three kind of here twice here's six five eight and then 806 and 608 are like a mirror and then here is 58 and 29 and so 2 times 29 equals 58 so

Yes, it's number play because it's not like it's, oh, it's just a palindrome.

It's not exactly a palindrome.

It's more like there are ways in which you can link across, but still interesting nonetheless.

So what about that 14 ilion?

So we got up to nine, seven, eight, and nine.

All looked pretty cool.

Let's take it to the 14 ilion Scheherazade number.

So remember an ilion is like three zeros, it's a codon of zeros.

So we're gonna take it to the 14 ilion.

Trigonometric limit, first 14 primes.

The 14 ilion Scheherazade number accommodates all of the omni-rational calculations of the trigonometric function tables whose largest prime number is 43 and whose highest common variable multiple is 45 degrees.

which is one eighth of unity in a universe whose polyhedral systems consist always of a minimum of four positive and four negative quadranted hemispheres.

So why does 45 matter?

Why are we going to take it up to 45?

Here's why.

45 degrees is the zero limit of covariating asymmetry because the right angle's 90 degree corner is always complimented by two corners always together totaling 90 degrees.

The smallest of the covarying 90-degree complementarities reaches its maximum limit when both complementarities are 45 degrees.

Accepting the concept that one is not a prime number, we have 14 primes, 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, 29, 31, 37, 41, 43, which primacy will accommodate all the 14 unique structural facetings of all the crystallography.

all the biological cell structuring, and all bubble agglomerating.

The 14 facets bring the polar facets, being the polar facets of the seven and only seven axes of symmetry of universe, which are the three, four, six, 12 great circles of the vector equilibrium and the six, 10, 15 great circles of the icosahedron.

So 45 degrees is kind of like the crossover point or angles.

So working within the 360 degree system, once you're like 45 degrees away from one side, then you start getting less than 45 degrees from another side.

And that will be explored more in 23.

So 22, tetrahedral complementations.

The sphere-to-space, space-to-sphere intertransformabilities is a conceptual generalization holding true independent of size, which therefore permits us to consider the generalized all-space filling complementarity of the convex sphere and concave space octahedra with the convex sphere and concave space vector equilibria.

This also permits us to indulge our concentrated attention upon local special case events without fear of missing further opportunities of enjoying total synergetically conceptual advantage regarding non-simultaneously considerable scenario universe.

There's probably so many ways to read this, but a few things that really jump out.

So we're indulging.

We're enjoying.

It's our regime of attention.

We are choosing where to put our attention.

We hope.

And these are all kind of like descriptive facts about the world or about numbers or whatever.

And so it's really about where we put our attention and

and then how we apply our attention given those generalized principles to local special case events like these four balls on the table.

And that is what allows us to enjoy a conceptual advantage because we can't think about it all at once.

It's non-simultaneously considerable.

But if we can concentrate our attention

and bring the right generalizations to the right specific cases at the right time, we will enjoy every opportunity synergetically.


UNKNOWN:
23.


SPEAKER_00:
We know the fundamental intercomplementations of the external convex macro tetra and the internal concave micro tetra with all conceptual systems.

Looking at the four successive plus, minus, plus, minus, x, y, z coordination quadrants, we find that a single 90-degree quadrant of one hemisphere of the spherical octahedron contains all the trigonometric functioning covariations of the whole system.

When the central angle is 90 degrees, then the two small corner angles of the isosceles triangle are each 45 degrees.

After 45 degrees, the sines become cosines and vice versa.

At 45 degrees, they balance.

Thereafter, all the prime numbers that can ever enter into prime trigonometric computation in contradistinction to complementary function computation occur below the number 45.

What occasions irrationality is the inability of dividends to become omni-equi-divisible due to the presence of a prime number of which the dividend is not a whole product.

So this last sentence is kind of like, it's kind of like a statement about prime numbers.

It's like saying you get an irrational number when there's something prime

that can't be divided by what you're trying to divide it by.

So that's why the Scheherazade numbers are based on prime numbers.

Because like, if we only get irrational blockings from prime numbers, let's use all the prime numbers we can.

Okay, now why 45?

Not totally sure about this because it seems like what if we had another system with 3,600 degrees around the circle, would we have to go to a higher number?

or will we just go to 450 or something like that?

But in either case, whether we think about this as sines and cosine, like once you are taking the sine, okay, it's like the Y value, and then all of a sudden you can flip it and it's like the X axis on the other side.

And another way of looking at it rather than just sort of like around the unit circle is about an isosceles triangle or just triangles in general.

So,

the triangle, the angles of an isosceles, when you have that right triangle at 90 degrees, which is the basis of trigonometry, like SOH CAH TOA, then there's one special case with a 45 degree and then the right triangle, like an isosceles right triangle.

But then any other right triangle, one of the angles is going to be less than 45.

This is why we factor completely or intermultiply all the first 14 prime numbers existing between 1 and 45 degrees.

Inclusive of these 14 numbers, we multiply the first 8 primes to many repowerings, which produces this Scheherazade number, which when used as the number of units in a circle, becomes a dividend permitting omni-rational computation, accommodation of all the variation of all the trigonometries of universe.

Okay, so.

We only get irrational numbers when we get blocked by a prime.

So if we multiply a ton of primes together up to the number that makes sense given isosceles right triangles, then we'll be able to have finite rational integer values

because we'll be like, instead of having a sine function that just appears to go off in forever, maybe if we actually divided it by this number, it would be clean.

And then here's one last point.

The four vertexial stars A, B, and C, D, so four points of a tet, defining the minimum structural ergo triangulated system of universe have only four possible triangular arrangements.

There are only four possible topological vertex combinations of a minimum structural system.

ABC, ABD, ACD, BCD.

in multi-frequenced modular subdivision of minimum structural system, the subdividing grid may develop eight positive and eight negative aspects.

So here are, for the minimum system, which is a Tet, there's basically four

That's the omni-triangulation.

There's four minimum triangles in the tetrahedron.

And then each of those has like a convex and a concave.

And so that's why there's hashtag mnemonics here because these are like all incredible memory and attention tools that help us navigate these ridiculously large numbers

but maybe it also says something pretty deep about the shape of thinking so

A little bit different today.

Hope that it was coherent and enjoyable because it was like two slightly more esoteric sections.

But we talked about memes and mnemonics for XYZ and the IVM, Isotropic Vector Matrix Coordination Systems.

And then we talked about the tetrahedron as a system and the

shahrazad numbers at least one pass on them so thank you everyone for watching if you've made it this far just congrats so hope you um write a comment or get in touch with me or just let me know what you are enjoying or not thanks again for watching and uh see you on the other side of the