SPEAKER_00:
hello complexity weekend welcome to the april 2022 complexity weekend it's april 22nd 2022. this is about to be the opening live stream and the opening of the weekend activities we're going to have 25 minutes of music by michael garfield

And then we will have an organizer's introduction followed by an interactive Jamboard.

So welcome to Complexity Weekend and see you all soon on the live stream and then for most of the activities in the Gather space.

See you soon.


SPEAKER_02:
RUNNER!


UNKNOWN:
Oh, my God.

so

so so

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_02:
Oh,


UNKNOWN:
Bye.


SPEAKER_00:
hello welcome everyone welcome it's complexity weekend 2022 and i'm daniel i'm here with sean and jen while i'm just getting some windows and such ready av awesome sean and jen feel free to say hello and kick things off


SPEAKER_03:
Sure.

I'll just please say I'm Sean.

You'll see me around all weekend.

Welcome to the cohort.

It's going to be super fun.

And I just love participating in Complexity Weekend.

It's definitely one of the most enjoyable weekends I have every year.

Jen?


SPEAKER_01:
Hi, I'm Jen.

I'm another one of your organizers, and I will definitely be around all weekend long.

And much like Daniel and Sean, I really deeply enjoy participating and facilitating and organizing Complexity Weekend.

We've been doing this for over two years now, so this is pretty exciting.

So great.

I think it's going to be a really wonderful weekend.

I've been looking at the program and I'm really excited about the facilitators that we have and the sessions that we're offering.

So I think it's going to be a great, great time.


SPEAKER_00:
all right well we're gonna start with this opening live stream and this is gonna be a two hour live stream so if you're watching live welcome and feel free to add any questions or comments in the chat just like we see people doing

And if you're watching in replay, then the Jamboard that we're going to be working with, as well as all of the Coda pages are artifacts that you can return to and you can listen to this to catch up.

The first hour is going to have a lot of context on CW, talking about CW as a community, as well as a lot of details about the tools and the practices.

And then we're going to

open up the Jamboard and have this kind of like post-it note tool that will help us walk through different aspects of the cohort.

And we're probably gonna share a lot about how to make the most of the weekend with all different modes of participation and ways of doing it.

And people will ask all kinds of great questions and it might go a few different ways.

So let's start with the weekend overview and I'll just like resize the slides while perhaps Sean give an overview of the weekend flow.


SPEAKER_03:
Sure, yeah, so the weekend is a really unique experience.

We're about 130-ish people in this cohort all over the world.

I don't know if it's like 30 or so facilitators.

And basically it's gonna be going 24 seven after this kickoff live stream.

So actually right after this two hour live stream, well, first hour we're gonna be communicating information and then jam boarding for a while, which is super fun together synchronously.

And then we're gonna jump right into Gather.

And Gather is where we'll be for the rest of the weekend.

And there's kind of three phases to the weekend.

The first is really just us as individuals

learning you know about complexity a lot of us probably a third is about the mark we get each time that are completely beginners to complexity so it's just a good time to figure out what is this anyway why is everyone drawn here you know for for this concept or these terms um and and it's about sense making together getting to know each other um and then toward the middle of the weekend is really where it gets fun where we um start to decide uh if we'd like to participate in teams together and that's really a

Not required, but a recommended way to learn complexity by doing really.

You form these diverse teams.

You'll find that the cohort is just a super diverse group of people, all different backgrounds and perspectives.

You just group up with different people and you figure out what problems are in the world that you're passionate about trying to solve and try to unpack a lot of these concepts.

We'll learn about complexity science and complex adaptive systems into real world problems in front of us.

and work toward Sunday, where we're going to basically have a nice closing live stream and talk about all the teams that may have formed during the weekend, different ideas and concepts that were unpacked.

There's always kind of fun trends and themes each weekend that just kind of emerge, which is just maybe the moment we're in.

Or I don't know what causes it, the different facilitators that happen to be in this cohort or participants.

But that's always fun to observe.

And you'll notice in the middle it says every odd UTC and even UTC.

there are two types of hours going on, basically, for the whole weekend program.

There's basically, on the odd UTC, all the live facilitator sessions.

So like I was saying, we have about 30 facilitators.

So we have about two facilitation sessions every odd hour, 24-7 through Sunday.

which is a lot of amazing content.

If you haven't looked in your participant single source of truth, which we'll talk about and seen the facilitator intro videos, definitely go check those out.

Cause we just have an amazing batch of facilitators.

Like I was blown away by the videos this time and it might be the best that I've seen yet.

And then every even ETC is really unstructured time where some facilitators from the set are gonna be hanging out in the barista stand in the kind of central cafe of our cohort gather space.

And they're just gonna be there

for questions or just conversation.

That's time that's just unstructured for teaming.

If you want to just learn by doing with teams, that's really what this weekend is all about.

But again, every participation mode is totally valid.

And if you want to spend the whole time just in Keybase and not even in Gather, just talking to people asynchronously via text, that's totally okay.

If there's any way you want, choose your own adventure with Complexity Weekend.

Jen or Dan, anything to add with the weekend flow?


SPEAKER_01:
I think that making sure that people really get that there's no wrong way to complexity weekend is a really important point.

I think a lot of people are drawn to complexity science because they're kind of spectrum thinkers, like you make connections between stuff.

um that seem like unrelated topics and then this kind of creates these new syntheses sometimes that's just an awesome conversation that you might have with somebody and i love having those awesome conversations totally um if you just want to sit around and chat and you see me somewhere just i'm i'm always up for that uh but sometimes out of those ideas

Either we get a new rabbit hole, like something we really want to study.

And so it just may be like participating in the sessions and learning and

and kind of creating our own synthesis.

And sometimes it's, you know, we kind of, this all comes together and there's, and we also feel like a call to action.

And then we feel like forming a team, whether it's to research an idea or to come up with a, you know, like a policy.

I've seen people's masters in thesis kind of gel in these sorts of teams.

And there's all sorts of different, you know, outcomes that we can have, you know, new businesses,

whatever.

And so I think that it's, it's, you know, and you can also come into complexity weekend thinking that you want one thing and it may change during the weekend and that's awesome and beautiful too.

So I just, I just want to make sure that if you want to like just hang out and be asynchronous and catch up on the sessions, that's great.

Um, and you know, and if you're feeling shy or you're feeling like you don't have the time commitment, um,

But if you wanna like, you know, jump in to the deep end and be like, I'm forming a team and it's gonna be my new startup, that's a beautiful thing too, so.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

so the way to go about participating every question you might have and the place you're going to want to look for everything about what you could do to participate is in the participant single source of truth so Sean will post that in the YouTube live chat but also it's been pretty much the one link that we've been sending and here's what it looks like so um I'll just

re-crop it, but in the weekend program section, it will be where you see the weekend program.

And so there are tables where you can find synchronous activities happening anytime during... Can you actually... What, Sean?


SPEAKER_03:
Can you actually post it?

I'm lagging like super hard.

I'm going to refresh.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, Jen, can you please post it?

All good.

So it happens.

So in the participant single source of truth on the program page, you'll see tables where there's what you can do at any time of day synchronously, totally checking in and out as works for you.

And you'll also see ways that you can participate asynchronously.

So the participant single source of truth, if you're watching now or in replay, is like the one document that you're going to want to be able to bookmark.

And also at the very top of this document, you'll see information about Complexity Weekend overall, including several other pages.

And we're going to talk more about some of these things.

Jen, yeah?


SPEAKER_01:
Sorry, I'm going to dodge out for one second.

I'll be right back.

I want to make sure I don't get enough feedback.

All good.


SPEAKER_00:
All good.

So the participant SSOT on the top section, the first subpage in the coda is the welcome letter.

And that welcome letter is also like just starting at square zero and addressing any questions you might have about participating.

the second page has information on Complexity Weekend and that includes some of the information about the community overview and the values and other aspects of Complexity Weekend which are also on this website which you can get by being in the participant SSOT and being on that second page the Complexity Weekend information

and also that weekend program section is just where you want to go so during the weekend the weekend program is where to look and then after the weekend there'll be an after the weekend page that you can find in there as well so that is just to give a very

specifics oriented description on the weekend we're going to unpack more about the weekend soon a lot about the who what and why and all of this but that was just to up front describe what is going to happen during this weekend there's synchronous and asynchronous opportunities for participation that are going to be addressable via your participant single source of truth and

and now we're going to pull back one layer to talk about complexity weekend and welcome those who are new and joining for the first time and those who have participated before but it's always changing and things have changed so much in the last months and years that just we encourage everyone to engage as if it was something they were approaching for the first time it's always something that we can show up for just

show up for you and however much time that takes but do make it fresh and connect with new participants and listen fully when you're there and and all of this so sean would you like to give a little history and initial conditions description as we go through these slides sure can you hear me better now my computer yeah it's fine okay good um yeah so basically um


SPEAKER_03:
We started in May 2019 actually as an in-person event.

We did one day in downtown San Francisco where we just gathered anyone we could who was interested in Complexity because we knew we were really passionate about it.

We just wanted to find others who were similarly passionate.

And it was a really great time.

And actually after that point where many of the facilitators at that event are still facilitators in Complexity Weekend,

Um, a little something called COVID happened and we had to figure out how we were going to keep gathering.

And, uh, and basically we decided to take the event online, like so many other organizations.

And that ended up being, um, really a blessing because it, uh, it opened up the whole community to this amazing global audience.

And it really just, uh, created so much diversity in our participant base that we've never really looked back and we're pretty much always going to be online now.

We love having people from 55 countries last cohort, probably similar to this cohort, just gathering and sharing their perspectives on all these different backgrounds and fields and coming together in diverse teams to really learn complexity by doing.

And since then, we've really had a really steady participation on each cohort.

We do two biannual weekends and monthly community events in between.

up to the point where we are now with April 2022.

And as you can kind of see on the slide also, you know, anywhere from seven to 12 teams form during Complexity Weekend.

And again, I want to encourage people to form teams, even if maybe they have a lot of bandwidth out of complexity weekend or a little bandwidth out of complexity weekend.

And they're like, I don't know if I'm going to commit to working on a team after the weekend or any of that.

Right.

That's amazing if that happens, but if you just want to form a team just for the weekend, just to maximize your learning, that is totally okay.

And I think the main thing there is just to talk to your teammates because some subset of the team actually may want to continue.

So it's just good to be clear.

about kind of your commitment level and what's possible.

But I would really encourage as many people as possible to be in this weekend experience as much as possible.

And that is preferred for you to do this team experience because it is just really an optimal way to learn all of this content.


SPEAKER_00:
this is a temporal view and multiple views of different systems are important and complexity weakens a complex system so here's another way to look at it here are the the energy levels and different kinds of things being measured on the y-axis and the weekends are when there's the most activity

out in the open it's like the tip of the iceberg part because it's when we have a commitment to this always active gather space and asynchronous activity and then there's periods of ebbs and flows and these smaller peaks at the monthly heartbeats and so here in the green line is the cw community energy and activity and sort of

focus of attention and then in the background is you and the connections and the teams and the projects that you're participating in whether that's re-understandings or contextualizing of what you're already engaged in or whether it's a relationship or like a discussion group or something that's more goal-oriented that is coming specifically out of wanting to apply complexity in a certain way any comments on that


SPEAKER_01:
Jen, what do you think?

I think that it's good to know that your energy in Complexity Weekend is not necessarily going to be the same as the community mean, too.

We're all going to have big energy on the

semi-annual events because we're all here together.

But if you can't make it to every single heartbeat, that's not a big deal.

I mean, teams change through time.

But I think it's also great that we have like these weekends where we can come together long time, you know, people have been doing this and then also bringing in new people to the community and welcoming new people because I'm always meeting fascinating new people too.

And so it's, it's,

you know, where you may be may not exactly match this curve, but I think this is kind of like a good representation of the community as a whole.

And to give you, you know, set your expectations about when, you know, kind of the regular times that you're going to find that re-energization for the complexly weakened community.


SPEAKER_03:
I actually have a quick comment, Dan.

It would just be that you see the phrase deep time here.

And I think one of the goals of Complexity Weekend is really to be this deep time, long running community backdrop for a global applied complexity community.

And what's really interesting to think about is, you know, we're all going to go on our own personal complexity journeys, our own life journeys, right?

Our teams are going to go on their own journeys.

But we always want to have this community backdrop there for people to reengage.

And that could mean you come back five years from now and you do another complexity weekend.

You know, what is your perspective going to be then?

You know, it's going to be so different from now on.

We want to make it where every time you come back to Complexity Weekend, it's something new.

It's always going to be a different cohort, different people, different organizers, different facilitators.

And just every time you get back, it's going to be a different journey.

You're going to get different things out of it.

So that's kind of an important point.

And one thing that really makes that deep time community possible is for participants to step up into being facilitators and organizers.

So that's a key thing we're going to drill again and again.

And we even have a form that we'll release a little later in the weekend for people to sign up for the rest of 2022, because there's all these great events.

So consider that, talk to facilitators and organizers, see what their experience is.

But yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

About those roles.


SPEAKER_01:
It is a bottom-up organization.

It's not, we're not like a fixed, this is my first time being an organizer.

I've been a facilitator the last four cycles before that.

But, you know, we're always looking to bring in new people, new perspectives, and it's really a bottom-up grassroots organization and not a top-down, we're going to tell you the way it's going to be.

So if you find an issue that you think that could be a real big improvement, there is totally an opportunity for you in multiple levels of leadership.

as participant, as a facilitator, and as an organizer to make those changes to keep on improving the community.

Sorry for stepping on you there, Dan.


SPEAKER_00:
No, it's perfect.

You totally covered much of this slide.

That's why I wanted to show it because you just described how everyone's a participant and how some of the participation guidelines and values are just pervasive in how we participate in our own way.

And then each event is...

co-created by organizers and facilitators and we'll talk more about those roles and the best way to learn about them is probably to talk to those people if you're curious but it's an event specific role and the organizers make sure things are happening and the communications occur

And the facilitators are the ones who during the weekend are doing those alternating sessions of the more guided, interactive, facilitated sessions, and then the more backdrop kind of facilitating in the teaming and office hours.

And all of this is happening during the weekend, as well as associate and supporter roles who also in an event specific way are providing financial or non-financial support.

And these are those cohorts coming in twice per year.

We also have those monthly heartbeats that are similar style, also in Gather, but a little bit less involved.

There's no asynchronous component.

It's just a drop in, drop out.

And also teams are participating in Complexity Weekend.

And as we'll talk more about, that includes the teams that are inside of CW, which are the committees,

such as the placemaking committee, the DAO committee, and all these other committees, teams as a committee.

And then there are teams that are participant driven and using their own set of tools and they can decide whatever platform to communicate on and whatever timeline, whatever context is making sense for them.

So that's how teams are fitting in to this sort of organizational description.

And so that's CW at that scale.

But the way that CW is going to be realized for the next

several hours or so, I don't know exactly how many, depending on how long your team lasts, I guess, is it's the April cohort.

So just to describe a little bit about our cohort, we have some descriptive information and then a bunch of word clouds that will serve as entry points and also conversation starters to help you just understand a little bit about this cohort.

One note is just because of some awesome

upgrades to our website which in in even short time are going to be incredible we didn't have completion of the information from every person so like all surveys and self-representations it's just like a partial um gleaning but we have 100 plus participants registered and 30 or so facilitators and they come from every non-antarctica continent and people are

all over and from all time zones so it's a global event and more information in future cohorts maybe but one piece of information we did have a lot of completion on was this question about level of familiarity with learning about complexity and then level of familiarity with applying complexity i don't think we've ever seen this kind of a pattern exactly where it almost is like

with the exception of the outlier, as always, that there's like a... There's some negative space.

What does it mean, Jen?


SPEAKER_01:
I don't know.

I mean, first of all, that's like you can pretty much...

like there's a one-to-one regression line there almost so it's a little bit below it yeah i don't know immediately like and of course the one outlier do we trim them to make our data or do we examine them because of the variation there so i don't know i mean we there's usually this kind of

very similar to one-to-one distribution.

The distribution looks fairly similar from cohort to cohort to me and that regression line looks pretty similar to me.

I used to be about what the mean is and now I'm about what the variation is.

So I'm not sure what that kind of the white space is above where like, I don't know much about learning about complexity, but I know more about applying it.

I mean, it almost kind of makes sense that there's, there's some, some blank space up there, but I think, you know, maybe people are underestimating their capacity at applying concepts.

Cause I always feel that that that's an area where we,

at least I often like I'll be lost in theory and be like, but you know, application when actually application is not as hard as we think it is.

So.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

This is just the organizer's introduction, and this is really just to show a little tip of the iceberg of the cohort, because almost all activities are going to be synchronously in the cohort gather space.

So just to give a few images, and then at the end of them, and either of you are free to make a comment, but I just want to show the images.

The word clouds we're going to show are for expressing complexity.

so here and here's the word cloud and these slides will be available um to be seen look in the program and you'll find the slides here and Sean if you could add it if it's not there here we asked of pick five words in any language that express or describe complexity for you and uh emergence pops out kind of

We asked, which kinds of problems or topics are you most interested in applying complexity science to?

And there was also a broad distribution and also a lot of shared focus, social change, environmental, science, climate, economics.

So many, many areas.

So this is kind of the pond you'll be swimming in when you're talking to people who you're bumping into.

And then two more.

What is complexity to you?

um this was um definition or just to take on complexity and systems came up as a super common word and then also there's this long tail of just amazing words that maybe one or two participants used

And then just one last slide was, what are you looking to get out of this weekend event and cohort and complexity, just like how complexity weekend is a complex system.

It was the biggest and in the center.

So I know that was speeding through a lot, but it was just so that this video could be like accessible, watchable video and people who want to dive into these and zoom in and discuss and unpack.

It's like, that's what we're all here to do.

But Jen or Sean, what's like a thought you have on that?


SPEAKER_03:
got a quick note because i know we got to move through the slides a little faster is um when you look at these distributions we'll put the slides in the um program um you really want to look at the smaller words right just like in that plot where you have the outlier we should all really strive to be the outlier right that's what makes some of the most interesting emergent outcomes is when you have a set of diverse agents in the system um that come together and kind of mix and match very different perspectives and backgrounds so you know try to find a team where

you know, maybe some of the smaller words are coming together to form a group and doing things.

Cause that's where the cool interfaces are going to be a novelty.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Jen, any thoughts or we'll move into the next section on values and purpose and guidelines.


SPEAKER_01:
I, you know, I can talk about this all day, so let's move on to values.

Come and find me in the gather space and we can talk about those long tailwords.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

So this next part of the first hour, we're going to talk about purpose, values, and guidelines.

And we're going to dwell briefly on this first important point, which is Complexity Weekend is a complex system.

And for most, but not all subsequent points, we encourage people to head to the PSSOT in the second tab, Complexity Weekend Information.

And then you'll find more on the overview of CW and the values, which were a participatory process with a .DAO committee over the past few months.

We totally refactored a lot of these values and guidelines.

So we're just going to dwell on the complexity aspect of this opportunity and challenge.

of community driven value creation and then all of the details that don't come up as immediately important we will just allow people to explore so sean what do you see here or what does the slide mean


SPEAKER_03:
So for those of us that have read a little bit about complex systems, you've probably seen this diagram at some point.

And this is just a really good way to kick it off because like Dan was saying, Complexity Weekend is itself a complex system.

The organization, our cohort.

So it's really fun to kind of see how complexity concepts are embodied just in our immediate experience of being part of this weekend cohort together.

So what we're looking at here is just an idea of

basically macroscopic views of the system and microscopic views of the system, right?

We're individuals and our interactions are actually going to create the culture of our cohort and a lot of the knowledge management and information and connections and it's amazing stuff at the top, but there's also a feedback loop from that down again.

where the culture that kind of emerges from our interactions will influence our individual actions again and so there's this really cool kind of cycle uh going on of positive and negative feedbacks and information processing in the system and how these local relationships are creating this kind of self-organization that we can take these complexity concepts and think about how we as individuals might go about interacting during the weekend

So what we're going to cover briefly is different values and guidelines and ways that you as a participant can kind of embody the values that have already emerged from past cohorts so that we can conduct ourselves in a way that really creates the most optimal emergent state for our cohort.

Right.

So maybe if you want to go to the next slide, Sam, we can kind of dig into those values and see how that might influence our guidelines as participants.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

So basically, um, you know, the only thing that really unified everyone, cause we're, we're so diverse is that we are interested in complexity, right?

That is complexity weekend.

Like that was the kind of keyword that brought everyone into register.

So we can sit with that and think about that shared purpose of, of learning about it.

And also applying it, right?

That was kind of in a lot of the copy on the website that brought people in was we're learning about these concepts, but also how to affect the world positively with them, right?

So this desire to have impact team, you know, noticing that teams are kind of a really good vehicle for having that positive impact in society and learning about complexity from different perspectives and applying that information.

Um, and mentorship, right.

That's, that's going to be a big part of this weekend, either from the facilitators, from participants to each other, right.

From participants to facilitators.

Like it's, it's, it's, there's all these different edges in our cohort, um, that are going to create a lot of value over the weekend.

And then if you wanna advance to the next slide, actually, we'll start with purpose, we'll talk about values, and then we'll go to the guidelines, which are kind of the most atomic micro level, right?

So this kind of looks like that diagram we just talked about, where the values or the purpose

are really at the top.

That's what's emerged out of all of our cohorts so far.

We want to learn complexity by trying to affect the world, unpack the terms into specific systems.

That's something that brings us together.

Wanting to serve through deep time, this idea of we're contributing to a community that should last

decades, if not longer, right?

And including to innovate, right?

Having teams with as much diversity as possible so that we can actually reach that level of innovation we're going for, right?

Danny, you got a little construction you might want to mute.

So basically, okay, cool.

So yeah, basically, like,

That form of innovation of getting many, many different perspectives to show up to the team, that's something that's going to give a fresh perspective on these problems, right?

That a lot of these problems have been attempted before, right?

We've had teams that are formed around homelessness or food supply chains or any of that type of stuff, right?

But it's trying to get different perspectives that have never been gathered at a table before that might bring us into new ground.

Right?

And then, so going one level a little bit lower than that, the values, right?

This is kind of what's created the purpose and have emerged from participant interactions, right?

Complexity begins itself a complex system, which we've talked about, right?

Having active education, right?

Really getting your hands dirty in order to learn.

Teamwork kind of being a way

to actually affect the world and not just being individuals and maybe intellectualizing the problem and just wanting to write a paper about something.

Writing a paper is good and that's a noble outcome for a team or an individual in Complexity Weekend.

But really trying to take it maybe one step further and seeing how these ideas can be applied.

Having accessibility and inclusion as a key kind of a tenant that we're going to engage each other with.

so that we can have the respect and the diversity that that respect empowers to get optimal interactions and optimal teamwork.

And then just being brave.

We're all here, we're in a kind of a unique environment.

If you've never done Complexity Weekend before or been in Gather before, it's a unique experience and it can be a little scary that that's the first time I'm trying something.

But by being brave and stepping up, that's what allows us to grow as a cohort, as individuals.

Jen, Dan, anything about values for move on to guidance?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I just want to like, I know we've had a lot of conversations about inclusion, you know, the, you know, the Jedi justice, equity, diversity, and inclusion kind of mode of things.

And, and I just,

like I know Sean and I have had, and Dan and I have had a lot of conversations about like how exactly does this take place?

But I think that inclusion is a necessary for the, we include to innovate is so key is, you know, that's just so core.

is that we really need to actively, not just possibly be like, well, I didn't make anybody mad, but like actively include because it is getting those voices at the table that I think really moves the complexity journey forward.

So I know that's something that is incredibly key to me.

And I know it's a value of all the organizers and everyone here.

So just, you know, it's, I think, super important.

And I think, you know,

again, it's a journey.

Nobody's ever going to do it perfectly, but I would think we're very committed to making sure that we make the community, you know, as inclusive.

And if there's anything that you ever see that we can improve on around accessibility or, I mean, really anything, that is definitely something, this is an iterative event.

Every event's different than the previous event because we've really taken all the feedback we get.

So if there's

If there's anything that needs immediate addressing, of course, just grab an organizer through whatever channel and that'll happen.

But if you've got a suggestion for the future to make this easier to approach and to remove obstacles for people, please, please let us know because that feedback is incredibly valuable to us.


SPEAKER_03:
Nice.

Yeah.

So just to kind of close out this discussion about values, it's, it really gets to the most actionable part, right?

It's like as a participant, whether returning or new, right?

How can we take that feedback from the macroscopic side, like the top level state into our micro level interactions as agents in the system, right?

And these are ideas like adopting a complexity thinking mindset, right?

And that could mean, um,

being open to interdisciplinary connections, right?

Not necessarily trying to think from just one perspective or one discipline as dominant, but trying to see the bridges between them, right?

Or having like a beginner's mindset, right?

Being open to letting the truth kind of come to you instead of maybe making assumptions about where the truth might be.

Those are all really great ways to be open to complexity thinking during the weekend.

And then things like communication, right?

Really thinking about how information is processed in complex systems, including our cohort and our teams, right?

And how our communication styles and strategies can help to create optimal outcomes, right?

And being relational about our thinking.

Embracing technology, right?

People who are participants for the first time will probably admit that it's a bit of a complex tech stack, right?

To join a complexity beacon cohort.

But every choice of tooling was actually thoughtfully chosen for certain reasons.

And it's meant to be a template for remote

global teams.

So that's something we'll see as teams kind of form during the weekend.

And we have this kind of mitosis event of all the complexity weekend tech stack moving into what your team is going to use initially, right?

You can go off and use whatever after.

But all this technology that's out

today is empowering a lot of remote teamwork and complexity thinking.

So we're gonna really use all that amazing stuff, but we're also going to know its limits.

Ultimately, we're humans using the tools and the tools are tools.

And just things like good audio visual etiquette, things will help the human connection, right?

Making sure your video's on if you're comfortable with that, talking to people just helps that human connection get past or get to the human point of using the technology, which is really where we wanna be.

And then lastly, just participation.

When you're present, and again, you can't be present the whole time, right?

We want to make sure everyone's healthy, they're eating, they're sleeping, right?

But when you're present, be fully present, right?

Try to really engage with the live session you're in.

Don't just kind of sit and unmute with no video and just, you know, kind of be a wallflower.

It's good to interact, right?

A lot of the sessions are about interaction.

And then reaching out on the edges, right?

Like we were saying with the long tail of these words, try to find where the edges are and connect those up.

That's what forms this really tight network of our cohort.

Any thoughts, Dan, Jen, about guidelines?


SPEAKER_01:
No.

Jen?

No, I just, I mean, I hope that everybody gets a chance

to participate as much as they can.

People have busy lives.

And I know it doesn't always work out the way we want to.

I know that there's been events in the past where I had the whole weekend blocked out and then I just had like parenting chaos going on and I didn't get to participate as much as I wanted to.

And that happens, but I think that you're being present and in the moment and it's where I think we get the most value.

you know if all you can do is show up and be a wallflower still please show up you know like you know we don't want we don't want people to feel like they can't participate but i think we always get more when we can interact with other people it's like kind of bouncing off each other that agentic stuff or um uh where that innovation comes from so


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

So we're going to very quickly move through the rest of the slide.

But just closing this values section, just know that it's up to all of us to enact these values and also to reflect them asynchronously.

So just be involved and stay involved if you want to implicitly and explicitly help that way.

So for tools, I'm going to...

leave the facilitator seeing this and i'm going to pull up the participant single source of truth because this is where you're going to go if you have any questions about tools and we'll add these slides as well is that fair or would you prefer going through these slides um let's go let's go to the sides uh just really briefly um um just because i think we've kind of highlighted yeah yeah so i'll just go really quickly yeah


SPEAKER_03:
So basically, right, there's Keybase, there's Gather, and there's Coda.

Those are the three main tools of our tech stack.

The single source of truth is in Coda.

Keybase is the tech stack end to our cohort.

And then Gather is our asynchronous audio video communication.

So Keybase, right, everyone's been invited to this at complexweekend.april2022.

It's just for our cohort.

So 130 or so of us are there, right?

And there's a bunch of channels.

And the main thing

to really know there is post an introduction if you haven't already so people know you exist, right?

And you're part of the cohort.

Post a request if you want a new explore channel, which is a type of channel where it's topical.

You can really just kind of flow with different topics or concepts and kind of engage with people around ideas.

um and then uh be sure if you want to see those explore channels which are opt-in you click the gear and you click browse all channels and you join as many of them as you're interested in the last note i'll say about keybase is on the explore channels you'll notice there's a pinned post at the top of every explore channel and that's actually a page in our single source of truth where we can actually scaffold

any knowledge that we accumulate together into our single source of truth so that it isn't just kind of flowing by right in the Keybase ephemeral chat.

The Keybase chat is super fun as it's flowing, but it isn't great at retaining knowledge or seeds of teams that are forming and whatnot.

So that's really what code is for.

Next slide, if we talk about Gather.

We're in Gather right now actually recording this video and we'll be in it all weekend.

All the live sessions are there.

It's this really fun

kind of space where you get this little 2D avatar.

You can use your arrow keys to move around.

It's kind of like Zoom, right?

It's video and audio, but you have control over your avatar and you can decide to go sit in a couch and talk to someone over here or move to the live session and go talk over here with the facilitator, right?

So it's completely kind of free form for you to do whatever you want in the space.

And because this is a global event, there'll be people in it at all times this weekend.

So it's just kind of a fun way to engage.

Again, if you're comfortable with it,

When you're in Gather, try to have your audio video on just so that you have that kind of human connection.

And if you have any trouble with Gather or Keybase, there's a tooling support channel in Keybase that you can hit.

That's all I think I'll say about that.

And then Coda doesn't have a slide, but basically, if you want to go to the PSSOT, Dan, we'll just really, really briefly, like in 30 seconds, go over that.

Why don't you do that, actually, Dan, since you've built a lot of that?


SPEAKER_00:
OK.

So the participant single source of truth

If you land on the welcome letter, you'll be able to just see an introduction and there's many pieces you can learn about the tools, like by going to the Coda page,

as well as the key base and gather page.

But a few good tips are you can enable dark mode to make it look like this instead of being light.

You can do some things on certain pages that are totally unlocked like editing and just like a word editor or a cloud document.

and other pages, you can leave comments.

So you'll either be able to leave a comment or enable editing directly.

And then this Weekend Program tab is like if you're wondering how to participate or where to go at any given time, that's the page to go to.

Should we continue with the role-based acknowledgments?

Or do you have anything else specific you want to add about Gather?


SPEAKER_03:
I think just really briefly what you can see on the slide are things like how to mute your audio video.

Again, etiquette, it's good to shut your audio off if there's some background noise until you speak.

There's actually in Gather, you'll see when you first spawn kind of in the central cafe in the bottom right corner,

are a bunch of single person mats.

So if you really want to kind of step away for a bit, good etiquette would be just to maybe go sit on one of those mats and then come back into the space when you're ready, right?

You don't have to leave Gather, but you can just kind of chill there and people know that you're away, that you'll be back.

And then lastly, you can see the people list.

There's a really neat feature where you can locate people.

It draws a line between you and them.

So if you're trying to go see a facilitator, you can look up their name and then hit locate on map and it'll just draw a line between you and them and you'll know exactly where they are.

And then chatting is split into three rooms.

There's the room chat, which is for everyone in the whole room, in this case, the central cafe or maybe the live session room.

Nearby is just people in the private space you're in, maybe the rug you're on with other people or people within a couple of blocks of you.

And then the inbox is actually a one-on-one message.

It only works when both people are in Gather.

So that can be handy, but probably I would prefer KeyBase for that.


SPEAKER_00:
So those are a few features.

If I could just share one more, the smiley face allows you to have a reaction.

And number six, raising the hand.

It's, you can see the raised hand when the person does so, and also on the people tab on the bottom right, that person will be on the top of the list.

So we super encourage people to help encourage everyone feeling comfortable to speak and just sidestepping a lot of challenges and friction that can arise with lag and with cultural and language differences.

We really encourage people to have their video

using these arrows such that they can see people whose hands are raised or be looking at the list on the right side and then really make an effort especially if you're a facilitator or just looking to facilitate in the moment to really encourage those who are asking to speak to to give them the opportunity to speak that's really important okay um let's

continue with the role-based acknowledgements this will be the last 15 minutes and then we'll go into the jamboard and we'll have a lot of time to talk about cool points like Anvesh who asked what does reach out on the edges mean but let's save that for the jamboard um so

Five of us were co-organizers in this cohort, and we've been meeting weekly and doing asynchronous tasks for about four or five months.

There was Sean, Jen, Sarah, myself, and Sid.

and just really appreciate working with everybody hope that you had a good time i know that i did and just really look forward to september 2022 organizing team which is open to anybody who wants to be involved as a total co-equal with any contribution or background

okay fine there were our awesome facilitators and we had around 30 facilitators we'll see the exact number when we actually see but just thank you for being a facilitator for volunteering and stepping up for complexity and for our community and for just each other in the moments of facilitation in this really really

important way because the organizers are just the email spreadsheet coda group it's the facilitators who really provide the the substance and kind of the the crystals that other things can precipitate around

they're facilitators because they're there to facilitate participation so these are not lectures that one is going to they're not panel discussions they're they're an interactive experience that is going to be embodied in both how the facilitators synchronously lead and guide their sessions and then in a different way how they participate through teaming and office hours

and they're just being a participant at other sessions.

And then asynchronously, how they curate the coda and how they step in and ask the right questions and be helpful in Keybase.

So just, facilitators, we really appreciate your work and also,

they have represented all journeys from previous organizers previous facilitators new facilitators first time to complexity weekend so we had many different facilitator journeys and hope that you get to know them all

We also wanna really appreciate something new in terms of a organizational structure in the last few months, and that's the committees.

So the CW committees are teams that are applying complexity to specific areas of Complexity Weekend specifically.

And they have different rhythms and different levels of activity, but several that were essential in their activity for what we have today.

is the dao which explored a lot of theory and practice related to different kinds of digital organizations but also scaffolded the work related to the values and mission statement which jen and many others were very helpful with

And we had a major infrastructural changes at the website and the CRM committees.

In placemaking, many important things happened.

Dot Teams especially has developed this entire Teams experience that we're going to go into a lot more in the middle livestream.

in detail, and then also in this Jamboard in the second hour of this live stream, and also so many other contributions.

But these are all complexity teams.

So if you just in the middle or the end of the weekend feel like you still have some bandwidth for learning and applying complexity, but there's no specific book you want to jump into or message you want to follow up on or team that you want to join based upon seeing it in the See Existing Teams section,

you can just come participate in the cw teams so that's what they're there for any comments on committees or anything else before we continue on


SPEAKER_03:
I think committees are just a great way to practice and learn complexity by doing in a team setting that's already scaffolded for you.

If you just want to engage for some amount of time, it doesn't even have to be very long, it's just already a team that's up and running, you can jump into, you can learn in that setting, and then you can jump out of again or keep going with it.

You don't have to have all the pressure of running your own team or starting your own team or any of that.

It's already kind of laid out for you as an easy on-ramp, and it helps out the whole community.

Any activity people do in the committees helps all of us by having this event series run smoother, the whole global community practice run smoother.


SPEAKER_01:
And I think the other thing is that you do not need to be an expert in whatever the committee is about.

Like I'm on the DAO committee and I am not an expert in DAOs.

And there's something great about that beginner's mindset is that you will ask questions.

that people who are really deep into any sort of process, whether it's wikis or websites, that they may not necessarily think to ask because the answer seems obvious.

And bringing that beginner's mindset back and in using that to kind of always

question our foundation to make sure that we're really serving the whole entirety of the complexity community is really important.

So if it's an area where you want to grow in, and you're really interested in the team, but you don't have a lot of existing expertise, you should still think about joining that team.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you, Jen.

I want to highlight two important pieces of what you mentioned, like the rhythm and being able to join a workflow and a stream and a rhythm, usually a weekly rhythm for the active committees where like

one can just show up and be part of a process.

And then that comes to the second part, which is the question.

And we always talk about how it's the beginner's mind and the beginner's question that can be that bifurcation point, cause a phase transition, bring something unexpected into the picture, change the outcome of a team through deep time because of showing up and asking a question.

And so one can

hypothetically evaluate like how much do I know about complexity overall as if that were even one thing to know or how much do I know about even this one term people are saying information theory or whatever it happens to be and one can evaluate as being like inexperienced and see that as actually something that they're bringing

with attention and care to the community and to the collective process.

So that's like really important.

And it goes, like Jen said, beyond just a sort of passive tolerance of those who have less familiarity on some axis.

It actually is how we see our differences in perspective and knowledge in the team setting when we're actually showing up being how there is something that is different than if people had just been studying or applying alone.

And it's things that happen in the committees.

A few last pieces on the role-based acknowledgements.

So we'd like to acknowledge a few of our associates.

Associates are those who are providing support and assistance and like partnership in some way through time in a value aligned way.

So maybe Sean, do you want to describe our associates and just anything else you'd like?


SPEAKER_03:
Sure.

Yeah.

So, um, and British box has been with us for quite a while and we really appreciate, uh, being associates with them.

Uh, basically Monica Kang and that whole organization, they provide a lot of training for our facilitators, every cohort.

Um, they just have a lot of really great resources and a great global network of innovators.

Um, we are a part of that network, right.

As a certain kind of innovator, right.

We like to, again, innovate through inclusion and, and through kind of diverse teams by applying complexity.

So it's just a really great alignment there.

Block Science is another great organization where they've actually been getting involved more recently in the DAO committee and helping us really model and understand how to build a decentralized autonomous organization that can run through deep time in a very decentralized way that allows us to have that kind of bottoms up emergent complex system behavior that we're hoping to form and sustain.

Um, so they've been awesome.

Um, and, and one great thing about associates and, uh, supporters, which we'll talk about in the next slide is that, um, it's not just an organization level relationship.

It's, it's macro and it's micro.

There's, there's gonna, there are gonna be facilitators around for most of these organizations in our cohort.

So there's actually a, uh, on the boots, you know, boots on the ground person you could talk to that's from that organization and is kind of representative of that, um, relation.

Um, so that's kind of.

interesting and novel um the research mentors organization is interesting too they basically focus on one-on-one um mentorships around research of any kind so it doesn't have to be you're going for a phd or any kind of more traditional research path you could be someone in industry who just wants to start writing papers about what they've been doing in industry right it's it's pretty open form and it's uh and it's about the relations it's about finding mentors among amongst the network and sustaining those those kind of one-on-one ties um so really grateful to the

and for the continued support.

You want to go to the next slide, Dan?

We'll talk about the supporters.

So supporters are usually the entry ramp into being an associate if that value alignment's there and that deep time commitment's there.

Supporters help with one event at a time.

And so for this particular cohort, we're just very grateful to Manifal and Eclosions for

What they've done for our particular cohort, ManaFall's helped a ton with building our website.

If you go to their website, they're a really unique web development firm that if any of the teams coming out of our cohort need that type of service, I would highly recommend them.

They've been great to work with.

And then Eclosions, Michaela, if you'll meet one of the facilitators in our cohort, really great just help with trying to understand how to get the word out there for Complexity Weekend and how to pull very diverse and tap new communities for our current and ongoing cohorts.

And actually Michaela has a unique way of supporting

And that she's going to be running three live sessions throughout the weekend where we're going to be kind of working on Complexity Weekend's marketing a bit.

We're going to be thinking about that problem together and applying our complexity thinking to solving that unique situation.

Yeah, so we're really grateful to our associates and supporters.

Yeah.

And if anyone wants to be an associate supporter, you can always email complexityweekend at gmail.com and organizers will pick that up and have a chat with you.


SPEAKER_00:
Great, and also there's never a financial barrier to participating in Complexity Weekend at all.

It's one of our really important values.

So it's totally optional.

At any point during the weekend, you can go to the PayPal link provided here,

Or you'll find in the participant single source of truth that there's information about supporting CW and about how truly the most important form of support is your continued participation.

That is really the most important way that you can continue showing up and being valued and valuable for CW.

And then also encouraging friends or colleagues to come.

I know you haven't seen your work in this way, but there's a cool event coming up.

Just join for this one time.

And also co-organizing.

co-facilitating, joining committees.

There's so many ways to support.

So hopefully if you're finding this valuable and you want to make sure that we can make this sustainable through deep time, then we do need support because it is a community driven effort.

So that is going to be it for this, unless you want to add any other notes.


SPEAKER_03:
I think, yeah, let's jump right into the Jamboard.

This is a really fun experience if you've never done this before.

We're basically going to post this link around, and people can hop in it, and we're all going to drop all these Post-its, and you're just going to start to see that kind of macro-micro engagement in the feedback loops kind of in action.

So, Jen, if you want to post maybe the Jamboard in the general chat of Cubase, I'll post it in the YouTube chat.

Oh, no, Dan already did.


SPEAKER_00:
So hop in there, everyone.

Yeah, while people are catching up and opening the Jamboard.

So in Jamboard, on the left side, there's a bar, and this is where you can make different kinds of modifications.

So you can open up a sticky note like, hello, and then that can be moved around.

You can also do different kinds of drawing.

and different shapes as well as just text.

And then when we talk about like going to the next slide where it says one out of 14, you can click on that and that's like the different slides.

And then you can click to a different slide

And that's like a drawer, or you can just advance or move back.

So those are some of the kinds of Jamboard moves that will be helpful to keep in mind.

And we're on this first slide, and that's just welcoming people to Jamboard.

And a reminder is on the second slide.

And the reason why we're using Jamboard during a synchronous event at all is because it can be a really fun, interactive,

example of complexity, just like Sean described.

And also it's an asynchronous artifact that can be continually modified.

So that helps make it really inclusive for those who are sleeping right now in our cohort, because this Jamboard is going to be a big component of the live stream.

And so it'll be something that can continue to

be modified throughout the weekend and people can return and listen to it and modify it while they're listening to the replay of this live stream so welcome to jamboard hopefully you're interacting with it or just listen because we'll try to read out some of the interesting parts

just remember that everything related to participating asynchronously or synchronously this is the third slide is going to be in the participant single source of truth and if you have any issues with accessing it just email complexityweekend gmail.com but everybody who has checked in once i'm sure it's worked after that so those are just the first slides in the jamboard because that's like the way that you want to orient to this tool

and see how it's being used so that we can communicate across time zones and have an artifact that's going to spur a lot of conversation in the beginning and in the middle live stream and it is going to be a way for us to like incorporate everyone's feedback asynchronously and have a really deeper conversation than if there was just a couple of us trying to give our takes on complexity so

Let's start with a little bit of online collaboration discussion and just approach this and orient this challenge and opportunity that we've all been dealing with for many years, but perhaps especially the last two question mark years.

And it's about online collaboration.

and it comes along with a whole bevy of ecological and psychological dimensions and that's definitely a complex situation so we just want to open this stream section

where we're going to be using online collaboration to talk about a bunch of different issues and open it just with some awesome tips that Monica Kang has provided from us previously.

And maybe just Sean or Jen, how can we come at online collaboration today

in April 2022 with like a fresh mind and an open approach and negotiate the coming days and the collaborations that we pursue.


SPEAKER_03:
I like point three a lot.

Assume kindness.

And I'll maybe add just a little bit to it.

And that's and be patient because especially with a very diverse global cohort, you know, there will be like communication issues.

And I think there might be technology issues.

And if we can all just have a little

bit of patience with each other and maybe wait for someone to reload or kind of ask a different way if you're not sure what the response, you're understanding the response.

Like those little things help a lot to allow us to feel comfortable with each other and really let go of kind of any armor and really allow us to connect very genuinely.

So that's probably one that I'd point out.

Jen, what do you think?


SPEAKER_01:
I'm looking at what we already have here.

You know over communicate is an interesting one is making sure that we're being full and confident in our communication and making sure that we're that the other person on the other side is kind of there with us and

Yeah.

I see confidence coming in.

So, you know, I think that's really useful.

And I think that to loop that one back to the act of listening is to, like, make sure you're asking questions.

Ask questions.

If you're not sure, there's so many interesting people with so many interesting realms of experience that you can never get enough of asking questions, in my humble opinion.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

And someone has encouraged breaks.

So definitely we're going to be really like in the thick of things sometimes and moving from place to place.

And it might be entities and terms and perspectives that you haven't considered.

So there can be a lot of novelty there.

and context switching and a lot of uncertainty about the future, both about like how certain aspects of the future will be broadly, of course, but also our own future as we engage in actions that might change how our future plays out.

as we always do but they kind of happen at a different pace during the weekend itself so it's like we do want to stay balanced and healthy and that's why so much of the discussion in the values is about just encouraging people to show up how it is working for them given their

and schedule and devices and internet, there's no one way to show up.

So nothing is compared.

It's special when people just show up and participate.

So that can be a really just important thing to keep in mind and just use the channels to over-communicate with Complexity Weekend facilitators and organizers.

Like email, the email address that every email has been sent from,

or post in our cohort team if anything is happening or use the Coda comment feature if you have a question about something and we'll just address it during the weekend and we can edit things on the fly because those are the kinds of tools that complex online communities can have today.

The others experience similar strangeness.

Thanks for sharing that.

What does it possibly mean?

I like that one a lot.


SPEAKER_01:
I think maybe we're all a little bit outside of our territories.

And so maybe, I don't know.

That's what I, when I read that, I actually really thought it was very poetic.

The others experience similar strangeness.

So I think it's all that we're all like, you know, hopefully we're all a little bit out of our depth sometimes.

somewhere in these conversations and to know that we're all kind of these points when we're all kind of like treading water and being like, wait, what, what's going on here?

And for me, like this leapfrogs into me is like make connections as, you know, kind of like, don't be afraid to like, kind of be like, well, this like sparks something in me and jumps to something else and, and to bring those together.


SPEAKER_00:
thanks jen i like what you said like being out of one's depth and about how in certain contexts that's seen as like a negative thing like i'm out of my depth in this class i'm not getting anything out of it i'm not adding value but then

think about the learning and the applying complexity plot and it's like i might be having a conversation with somebody and that might be the first time that they've heard of a term like feedback loops or asian-based modeling but it's going to be my first time talking to somebody involved in grocery supply chain in this part of the world and so it's always a dialogue where one can see that like out of depthness or difference in familiarity with

an idea or with a person or with a region and so there's just so many ways that complex systems play out that yes we can like always step into that um depth so let's go to number five slide what is your intention this weekend and I'll add the kind of corollary question why and how do intentions matter for complex systems


SPEAKER_03:
A lot of people went ahead and they're going to hang a jam for it.

They're going ahead and adding stuff.

What is that picture of in the bottom right?

Is it like mushrooms?


SPEAKER_01:
I love it.

I know the network, the forest network, the fungal mycelium network has definitely been big in a lot of people's minds.

Thanks, Star Trek Discovery, I guess.

I admit, I don't have

that appropriate streaming service.

I need to, I guess we're gonna have a crackdown on passwords.

So I can't say like, I need to find the right person, but, but I always love that the fungus and these underground connections between things as both a complex system and also like, you know, it's literally out there in the world, but also as a metaphor for the work that we're doing.


SPEAKER_00:
So when and how do collectives have intentions?


SPEAKER_03:
I think we can't know at this stage, right?

Like I was saying, in past cohorts, it's always fun to see what themes kind of just pop out and kind of keep circulating.

I think intentions are probably similar.

Like we'll get into Gather.

after this live stream, we'll meet each other and we'll start working.

And then I think intentions will start to pop out and emerge as well.

So I'm kind of excited to see what that looks like.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, May 2020 was definitely all about the COVID.

But I think, but that wasn't the only thing that was happening.

So there were other themes that went on.

And I think that's been consistent through all of the events that we've done since we went online.

I missed the first event.

I didn't know you all then.

But I've been a participant and a facilitator for all the other, for the online events.

So it's been great to see how these intentions and these themes like emerge and kind of pop up with who brings something with them and how these networks kind of come together and emerge into something

more, there's a fruiting body, you know, like there's mushrooms and something kind of like a team comes out of it or something.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

So someone wrote, ask dumb questions to listen, not hear.


SPEAKER_03:
reminds me of a theme from from last cohort in november with alex who's a participant this time um where he was a facilitator in november and he was doing uh um explore stupidity and team stupid and dare to be stupid dare to be stupid the idea of maybe maximizing your learning by just jumping in ask them questions right like like get as much information as you can by flailing as fast as possible

approach that was kind of a fun intention that popped out of November because other it definitely infected others in the cohort it was fun to witness them all do uh all these little games around the space and everything that was super fun Jen yeah I was going to say like the the fact that being one's out of one's depth and barely treading water is a metaphor like this is a very safe space for doing that


SPEAKER_01:
And yeah, the Team Stupid was super fun.

I remember at the after party, we all chased each other in circles using the follow function for like, that went on for a while.

And then we had some karaoke too that was kind of dumb.

That was fun.

So it was definitely not super skilled.


SPEAKER_03:
One thing I'll mention is the ping post that I actually put out because this time around, my intention is to try something new with the live sessions that I'll be doing, which is trying to really connect our cohort

with people outside of the cohort so that if a team is thinking about doing like a healthcare solution, for instance, how quickly can they get networked to like a nurse or a doctor or someone in medical insurance to talk to them and question all their early assumptions, right?

That's something I wanna explore and see how that affects the trajectories of some of these teams.


SPEAKER_00:
How would you relate that to some aspect of complex systems?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, definitely feedback, right?

It's, it's, it's, and, um, it's, you know, exploring a kind of phase space.

Like if you are, have a certain bias in your model and an assumption, you'll explore a solution set over here.

Whereas, um, you know, say you had a bunch of people come together and they wanted to figure out, um, end of life care or something.

Right.

And they, none of them have experienced.

that directly right they don't have the lived complexity experience of maybe being around people in that care um one conversation with an end of care nurse could totally flip their assumptions upside down right and then they would go a totally different direction um and end up in a totally different space um so i guess that brings to mind kind of chaotic dynamics you know and

and little perturbations initially that can cause very exponentially divergent paths.

I'm hoping to cause as much chaos as possible upfront.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Thanks for describing it.

Very interesting.

And when I look at listen, not hear, I think about our senses and just how our different senses are like the agreed upon ways that we're interfacing with the world.

So if listening and hearing and that distinction, but just that auditory sense can be seen in a complexity participatory fashion,

like this person is bringing up, then it's like, then everything auditory could be approached in a complex way.

So I don't know what that means or how sound could be approached that way, but being able to have people paying attention to each other, making connections and to be able to be

making those connections synchronously and asynchronously.

I hope it's an environment that a lot of people will resonate with.

So anyone can now flip over to slide six.

and we'll stay on this one for a little bit and maybe graph things out but we really encourage if you're watching along live just feel free to add stuff early and often so this one asks who are you and how did you discover complexity and you could write your keybase username or you can just add anonymous notes so although some of us had facilitator intro videos um

How do we come to complexity?

Maybe Jen, go for it.


SPEAKER_01:
You, you know, I always talk too much about this one.

It's an easy toss.

So, yeah.

So I first got interested in complexity, just being a kid laying in the grass and staring at blades of grass.

How many times?

And like staring at the clouds.

And yeah,

You know, in trying to understand how there's these patterns and how they can emerge, you know, you're a little kid, how much you get the DNA is like a code, right?

And like, at that point in time, it was, you know, you think of it more as like being a blueprint.

Of course, that's not what DNA is actually like.

Because DNA is way more complicated and more simple than that.

But, you know, when you get a little kid with what was the kind of understanding at that point in time, scientifically, plus your little kid understanding.

But even still, like when I got to the point where, you know, I'll skip through a lot of the stories that I always tell to like when you're reading like James, like chaos for the first time.

And I didn't know anything about wildlife biology, but reading about how it's actually some fairly simple algebra that creates these really complex interactions and unpredictable interactions between predator and prey populations and really grasping how it can be really, really, like a really, really simple equation that creates this incredible breadth of

of behavior that we can't always concretely, reductively predict.

For me, those moments really crystallize.

There's something in the world, there's insights out there.

I think that's kind of what a lot of us have some sort of aha moment

in our lives where it's like we kind of, for me, it's still not easy to voice, but we have this kind of like aha moment that it can both be really simple and unpredictable and complicated and always beautiful too for me.

I always find it beautiful all at the same time.

And that there's like a deep, there's kind of something hidden behind the curtain for like understanding the patterns of the world, so.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you for sharing it.

When I see this, I remember a conversation that I had with Amir, who is a facilitator and previously had been co-organizing.

And so we were playing around with the Jamboard and we found this laser tool down on the bottom here.

So it just is like a transient trace on the Jamboard.

And then also there's the pen tool.

And so we have this question and it's phrased in language.

And then sometimes complexity, you know, Sean complexity is to give a clear idea

keyword or like meaningful sentence answer and that's like one kind of unpredictability is just answering the question and and we'll like read more out of those type of linguistic journeys but then there's like the complexity of

how one interacts with it and then there's like the pen and the laser and so there's not just multiple ways to answer a question with words there's also a complexity that go like beyond one genre of response

and the tools can only like barely capture that so it's not like 200 word essay different people are gonna like think through and enact complexity in just a ton of different ways and hopefully just stick with the similarities and differences because complexity is an awesome area and community too so let's read some of these yeah jen


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, I was gonna say, Dan, you know, I always wondered, you are a wildlife biologist, is that how what is your field defined as?

I know, I know what you study, but I don't know what your definition is.


SPEAKER_00:
Entomology, insect studies, and those who love them.


SPEAKER_01:
So what is is like the complexity baked into your field?

Or is it something that only some people in your field do?


SPEAKER_00:
Some entomologists, I think, feel very at home with complexity and it touches on a lot of different key complexity ideas like ecosystems and evolution, development and behavior.

but perhaps not all.

And that's very similar to other fields where some people in the area might like totally have two feet in complexity and see the core of their field as being like a complex phenomena.

and others who are on the projects with them might not.

And I think that's like an experience that we all start to talk about and share.

And then what happens when we're in a context where actually what we do share isn't the disciplinary context, but rather the complexity context.

And then we find the specifics like from the bigger complexity space, rather than be in the disciplinary space, trying to justify a pattern between like,

an ant colony and a brain, which in some conversation flies fine and in others, it doesn't.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

So I know that because I'm, for those of you who don't know me, I'm an anthropologist and an archaeologist and in a deep time questions and human evolution amongst a broad variety of other topics.

And, um,

I think there's very few people in my discipline that are actually really familiar with complexity science as a topic.

And when we are familiar with it, we're actually reading stuff about social insects and thinking about how is that relevant to understanding how humans are social with each other.

So I always found that that was a really interesting crossover that goes in one direction.

I don't think there's a lot of social insect scientists that are reading a lot of anthropology.

Maybe they should.

I don't know.

But I've always kind of wondered where that... So were you into complexity before you were into ants?

Or which order?

What was the chicken and which was the egg there?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Almost a double onboarding, actually, because it was my graduate school advisor, Professor Deborah Gordon, who

help me understand and connect to complexity specifically, but also ants.

So sometimes I guess the discipline and the complexity start at the same time, but they always develop like so differently.

But let's look at some of these points.

And we haven't forgotten about reaching out on the edges.

Let's write that down on the post-it.

So here's some of the ways that people have discovered complexity in this totally very busy slide.

Sometimes I came to hear about complexity principles, complexity science insights.

Most significant times were when complexity hit me across the face with a hundred wet kippers.

That's when I realized that

Next one, trying to find connections between conceptualizations and expressions in art, science, and in philosophy.

And that's one of our cohort participants with their Keybase name that you can look at.

So insights and principles and connections.

These are definitely awesome journeys and things that people are bringing and they're like letting you know how they are showing up with these topics.

so major interest in narrative cool topic kind of a thinking person impressed by systems that's a mirror so one it's a little double entendre with impress like to have a high regard of and to to have the mark left upon

All caps.

That's a key base name.

Here we have global connectivity inequality.

Thinking about the long term and what persists over time.


SPEAKER_01:
awesome um so yes in the middle i'm a huge fan i spent quite a bit of time in nightclubs staring at them pondering what they were about so that was definitely an onboard for me as well so whoever wrote fractals we can talk about how cool they are i guess um at your at your leisure so cool this might be my favorite jamboard slide we've


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, this one's fun.

Let's go to slide seven.

And so we've moved from our intention that's orienting us to this participatory complexity space to a little bit of a discussion about how our journey has bounced around with different projects and contexts, interests, tools.

And now we're going to approach this question of how can complexity have impact in real world systems?

how have you successfully applied complexity or not?

How and where would you want to apply complexity?

And so this is where we, with a slide that looks freshly empty, we can ask like, how do we go from that curiosity

and those interesting patterns and connections and insights that people were just raising on the previous slide.

How do we move from that insight to some kind of action and impact?

Or is there even another framing that makes that question not even make sense?


SPEAKER_03:
Yes, I put the green post it and I think

The idea behind this is, you know, can you come up with a few simple rules that might model 80, 90% of what you're observing and allow a human to kind of grok, you know, what's going on and with enough understanding to feel like they have enough agency to,

nudge it in the right direction, or maybe find what we call a leverage point in complex systems terminology, or one point you can nudge the system and get a nonlinear effect much bigger than your nudge, hopefully in the positive direction in a long-lasting way.

So those are ways, I guess, if you're successful, which is hard to do, because a lot of times you'll find the leverage point and then you'll push it in the wrong direction.

That seems to be a common behavior.

But that's one intention or hope of applying complex thinking to problems.


SPEAKER_00:
This very interestingly separates the simple modeling

from the question about what is the environment what is the system of interest what is our uh direction of positive measured how and that's some of the pieces of complexity that get engaged when we do talk about applying complexity like if we were interested in some aspect of the environment beyond just thinking about the environment as a complex system if we want to think about it from a

wildlife management or some other type of applied perspective, then it's going to require these conversations about like what is being defined as better and what is being pursued over different timescales.

So we'll read a few more and we'll come back to the edges.

Real world systems are complex.

We dumb it down to understand and play with.

This reminds me a lot of this sort of, is it simplicity theory?

Is it complexity theory?

Simplicity science?

If you're explaining complex outcomes with simple systems and simple rules, like is this about making things simpler or is it about making things more complex?

And is it something like a little bit of both?

So what do you think, Jen?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I think that, you know, one of the most obvious ways that we can apply complexity and particularly complex adaptive system,

which is a huge part, but not the only part of complexity science, is I think thinking about our modern economic moment is a big, you know, and kind of what our future economic moments are going to be is like a big zone for where we can apply things.

Because we always say, what is it?

All models are wrong.

Some of them are useful.

And that used to infuriate me when I would hear that.

But I'm like, but they're wrong in really important ways.

And one of the ways that I would get really frustrated about is how we treated the environment as an externality.

and pollution, where it goes as an externality, how we're impacting air quality and so forth.

with production and they're just like, oh, well, you know, the earth is really big and it's really hard to measure and it doesn't make our model work well.

So we just treat it as an externality so that our model works.

And for me, I found that really frustrating and it was really the frustration with this reductive point of view.

And it's that I think that complex adaptive systems have this opportunity.

to include what we've kind of like put on the outside as externalities because we can see that they're actually, like we can't actually exclude them.

Is that, you know, iteratively through time, if we're making all of our workers sick because we've poisoned the groundwater, that is going to have an impact on our productivity and, you know, and things like that.

So I think that it's having a

a kind of a broader mindset that we can actually create deeper insights into what's going on and things that aren't necessarily obvious.

I think that's an obvious way for things to get applied, but there's, I think, many more, many, many, many more ways that we can think about it.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you, Jen.

I want to read some of these awesome comments here.

So, how...

Here, Anvesh is describing different levels or scales of systems with state, markets, community, and individual.

Here, Stephen has written about how can complexity have impact, allowing groups to have time to find complex outcomes and engage in healing and growing, rather than always trying to always solve or fix problems.

And so it's totally compatible and really like bolsters our discussion about the deep time and about

Sunday at the closing ceremony.

Maybe you'll submit a prerecorded video of your team and you'll have had just a few conversations and an intention.

You don't need a minimum product.

It doesn't need to be a pitch.

There's no evaluation.

It's like a space where that kind of complex outcome can be cultivated.

So here's a little bit of a discussion.

Most systems are simple or not complex.

And then another post-it writes, most engineered systems are simple.

Most natural systems are complex.

What is complexity?

Aren't these always the conversations we have?

And is your complicated my complex?

Or do I treat complex as a subset of systems or some systems some of the time?

And we can have both post-its.

They don't need to block each other and they can hang out and talk and they can both be working together on the same project.

And that's like kind of how we work together with complexity.

Jenner, Sean, what do you think about that?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I think also that when you can have two simple systems, for example, or, you know, just, we can just start with just two.

And when we couple them together, that's when chaotic, you know, unpredictable emergent behavior and, you know, you know, can actually really happen.

So we can, systems can be simple, but it's like when we bring them together and connect them, it is not a Lego system unless you're, I mean, maybe it was like my Lego system.

Cause that was,

some unpredictable outcomes there.

And I think it's the coupling of the simple systems together.

And we think we might understand that one simple system, but it's when we couple, you know, as I said, predator, you know, population levels and prey population levels.

And you just, you know, couple those two differential outcomes together and you get, you know, all of this emergent behavior.

And so I think they can both be right.

And you're right.

They don't have to fight with each other.


SPEAKER_03:
I do think, though, that personally, I think simple systems are rare, and that they usually have some degree of engineering to have produced them.

And that, to Jen's point, they probably have to be isolated from other systems to some degree to maintain that simple behavior.

And I just think all of those conditions combined make it probably rarer to have that simple system behavior than

uh to have it uh get messy all of a sudden and become complex right when when that when that isolation goes away on accident or something you let certain air in the room or something boom now it's complex again oops you know


SPEAKER_00:
This is awesome, and it ties those two points, like the hidden externalities.

Like, okay, is this metal ball that I'm holding, it's simple, you know?

It's not having unexpected behavior.

It's like, well, if we don't think about the supply chain, maybe, but if the phenomena of that...

becoming an artifact and unbecoming and its life cycle and all of the ways that it impacts you psychologically and the reflection and the strange loop it's like it's gonna send us

onto a project if we can't stay on that discussion but i want to keep reading these um awesome points there's so many to share so really thanks everyone so an appreciation of complexity and nuances of different systems might inspire more empathy and inclusivity awesome really important point

Here's a failed attempt, a learning attempt, a cybernetic update attempt.

Researching that leads to infinite new papers without ever feeling like I know enough to say something concrete.

Great and really, really...

Yeah.

Even with finite new papers, it can be hard to say something concrete, even before you get into the whole infinite sum question.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, we are limited by our lifespans.

So there's always a limit.

We may not know what that number is, but there is a hard look at how many we can actually produce.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

So here's a few more with some participant Keybase names.

So this is someone's experience by reframing the conversation within naturalized sensemaking in the fields of innovation and product management.

That sounds super interesting.

Interested in...

If global priorities research, here defined as trying to determine the world's most pressing problems, could be improved with more complexity thinking.

Awesome.

Thanks for sharing that.

These are also really important points.

So in matters of heart and head.

Cool.

Maybe the same poet from before strikes again.

But that's very beautiful.

And it doesn't...

need to be mapped on to learning and applying or thinking and feeling or any number of other binaries but it does capture this like holistic minimum of two perspectives even if there's just one pie there's still like the crust and the not crust part or something like that like there's always a way that we can be motivated by

more like a science or a research question or a curiosity question and more like an application impact and we don't need to choose one we can be genuinely interested in how human groups communicate and really want to help communication in a certain situation specifically like starting tomorrow and then we kind of connect those with the more knowledge based and the more utility or impact based when we start working and so

one thing that can happen and it's like we've all been there is maybe learning without acting and there's a time and a place for everything but i think what a lot of this on the slide speaks to and what a lot of facilitators are going to highlight and what a lot of participants are motivated by is the desire to be like okay there's been 50 years or 80 years of feedback loops

What's the conversation today about how we're going to talk about those economic feedback loops or these kinds of communication feedback loops and then do something that is positive and having an impact in real systems?

So those are like really important questions that we bring up.

Any last points or can we continue?


SPEAKER_03:
I think one last point I can make is if anyone watching this or either live or after the fact sees any of these post-it notes and it really resonates with you and somebody's put their key base handle there,

feel free to reach out directly to these people and say, I really love the post you made and the Jamboard.

um, we should chat more, you know, maybe we might want to work together over the weekend or learn together or, or anything.

I think that's really the point of this whole weekend is to, to, to feel like you can just reach out to any facilitator, any participant and make new connections and learn through those connections.

So, you know, we're a small group, we're only 130 people.

It's intimate.

We can get to know each other over this weekend.

And so anytime you see anything like this,

make sure your key-based handles are attached to a lot of stuff so people know how to get ahold of you.

And when you see something with a key-based handle attached, don't feel like you can't reach out, reach out directly.


SPEAKER_00:
let's go to eight and it will take just a few seconds for people to catch up so we're gonna be exploring now the the next question after we're getting excited maybe reflecting on some times where things have or haven't um we have or haven't seen complexity be applied appropriately or we want to see complexity or we're just curious about whether it could be applied differently and

What is that going to look like from kind of an operational perspective?

And that's the question, how do we best collaborate on complex projects?

Projects are going to be complicated and complex and all of that in many dimensions.

And we're going to explore that a little on this slide and talk about like recognizing that complexity and working with that complexity of global online remote teams on complex projects or even just self-driven work on complex projects.

But how do we collaborate and work together?

So Sean, what are some first points you'd add?

And then Jen, anything you want to share?


SPEAKER_03:
I think I'll go with the blue one, actually.

And this is kind of in line with the live sessions I want to try out this time.

The idea of not jumping immediately to execution, right?

One of the reasons why we don't aim to have something built by Sunday, or it's not like a typical hackathon or something where we're going to be up all night coding or building something, is that we want to leave a lot of room up front.

for understanding what shared purpose is even bringing us together.

Like what problem do we wanna solve?

Can we define that problem?

What assumptions are we making about things?

How can we break those assumptions?

How can you do a lot of that upfront work of asking difficult questions?

Something that will inevitably come up this cohort is the idea of catechisms and like helping teams ask really hard questions early on so that they can,

like assess their own bias going into problems or going into collaboration together.

And the more difficult the problems or the questions are up front, the more you break those assumptions up front, the easier it can be to actually find the right path that will be best to be on.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you, Sean.

Jen, do you want to add anything or I'll give a thought?


SPEAKER_01:
Sorry, I'm like flipping around different screen or different tabs here.

So I just thought of the sharing power.

And I think that this is really important when we're talking about collaboration is to make sure that, and I think Sean's brought up some excellent points about how he's not just gonna be discussing the importance of, but actually making, connecting with stakeholders

um a really central part of projects in and answering questions and i think that in terms of collaborating effectively particularly with like stakeholders and within our group is making sure that you know that this some personalities just kind of naturally rise to dominance um and to make sure that

that we just don't kind of like default on that.

And that we, particularly when we're working with stakeholders, that we're not just going like, hey, can you answer this question for me?

But we're really allowing them to be part of our project and to have the power to make big changes to what we're doing, how we're thinking about things, how we're viewing things.

And I think that's really hard because a lot of times we come from

Um, you know, the very Western point of view of, of, you know, it's my project and therefore we're doing X, Y, and Z and that sort of leadership.

And that's really effective for a lot of us in terms of various academic, professional, uh, and other pursuits.

Um, but it, I think it doesn't always work in this context.

And I think that being very conscious about how we're doing things there and, and allowing.


SPEAKER_00:
everyone to be able to change us and our projects and our points of views is really important for how do we collaborate effectively thank you jen really appreciate that like um also great things written here so let's read a few more and then i think we still need to come back to reaching out on the edges or maybe that is how we reach out on the edges is like by returning and turning over the same stone many times so

have sharing power treating every statement as inherently having some level of uncertainty over communicating it and being clear about it but also being kind in the interpretation it's kind of like on both sides of that

by maintaining contextual awareness and using the right tools for the right context yes this is really awesome and important comment and just one little micro note that i have on that is like speaking for shorter intervals it's easy to be on a spontaneous 60 seconds to longer

discourse it's very challenging to spontaneously make that coherent but it can be extremely expressive so if the context is special in that kind of sharing space that can be really powerful and i hope that like in that moment that it can stay open for that person to share and also if it's like a group discussion with 25 people then

each person can only speak for two minutes on average for example so like keep these kinds of things in mind in a whole hour so just there's a lot to it but those are just a few ways um listen for for unfamiliar narrative to weave into the known real leaders create real leader create new leaders hopefully and grandchildren leaders try not to be defensive when your approach is questioned

And then here is one I added to Sean.

So Sean wrote, don't execute immediately, leave that space for openness.

And then I added a yes and, and just said, yes and be implementing the specifics, which can include just scheduling a next meeting or committing to a regular sequence of meetings, like implementing those and not letting the implementing the specifics

be a contradiction to like leaving maybe even a lot of uncertainty about very high level aspects of the team and then complexity sometimes when we're collaborating is like moving back and forth between like what time are we going to meet and then what kind of

adding should I do on this slide?

And then like, what are we doing in this team?

Like, what is my association with this team?

Those are all part of the complex journey.

And it's not just because we're volunteering at a online community event.

That's like life with a lot of these questions.

Communicating effectively, trying to explain in lay terms to stakeholders the complex findings you found as many times as needing.

Much of the time is rephrasing after feedback.

Awesome, and the short feedback and that critical term of feedback, like for complex systems, it comes up again.

And being able to, for example, when a new term is introduced,

making sure that everybody is aware of what that term means before going forward is like one way to help the conversation and figuring out the complexity of navigating that.

Like, you know, I see Jen's 500 books

behind her and i just think like we could we could go into each one there's like a library in each person whether they have the bookshelf there or not in our complexity of knowledge and applying and so just how we balance that over the weekend and in the community with all these things happening at once like these are some of the realities of collaborating on complex problems

compile feedback into one feed.

This is awesome.

And it's definitely something that the organizers do.

We have a feedback requests and feedback, but we have a feedback page in our single source of truth that absolutely

does cover that and in after the weekend there will be a feedback form placed here in the PSSOT right above the link to organize and facilitate so it's like one kind of way that you can be part of that feedback is to give direct feedback like to email address or to any individual or through this feedback form

And then the next way to be part of the feedback loop is to be involved more actively as a participant again, or as an organizer or a facilitator, but that's from the PSSOT.

Let's just talk a little bit as we head into our first gather sessions in our last 10 minutes.

We're gonna go to slide nine, and we're gonna talk about what makes Complexity Weekend an amazing space.

We have appreciations and desires and tensions and frictions.

And after this 10 minute section, as it says in weekend program, right after the opening live stream, we're going to head to our first session in Gather where there's going to be one-on-ones, the opportunity to meet other participants or just hang out with Jen and do an office hours.

So this is like, as we're now taking all of this discussion we've been having from the first part of the live stream,

about complexity weekend and then the second part of the first hour of the live stream where we talked about values and guidelines then in the jam board we talked about like some exciting ideas from complexity about our different journeys different things that we were curious about in complexity and then also how complexity could have impact and how we might collaborate on it and now we're coming to this last

10 minutes when we're going to be just kind of bringing it back home to our cohort and setting the stage for participating with each other.

So welcome back, Sean.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_03:
My laptop can't handle the complexity right now.

I need to restart.


SPEAKER_00:
What would make this complexity weekend a great

time and experience for somebody who's joining for the first time or for somebody who's been at an event before so i think um if you can hear me one one tension or friction would be using acronyms um or things that are kind of jargony


SPEAKER_03:
and not unpacking them.

So it's definitely okay to use jargon.

It's a really effective way to communicate within a discipline or within a team or a field.

But if you don't couple that with unpacking it when you're talking to other people, then it becomes very exclusive, right?

And it makes it hard for people to follow you and be part of the conversation.


SPEAKER_00:
Totally agree.

So here in ink trace appreciation of gather and of welcoming space.

So thanks for writing that.

We'll see what gets written over here.

an appreciation and a desire.

So something that is both preferred and also we can really feel and express our appreciation for.

I would say when people come to facilitated sessions and show up in office hours, there are two ways to be participating synchronously and just being muted and listening

can be important and you won't be called on or evaluated.

And if somebody does ask, it'll be just in an optional way and just being able to listen and participate however is what it is.

So I would hope that's both something that we desire, but also appreciate.

And it is what makes Complexity Weekend, you know, period, let alone any kind of space.

So that's like really important to keep in mind.

Friendliness, kindness, generosity to people, people, tools, and ideas.

The finer things in life.

Openness to exploration.

All right, awesome.

Let's tackle this one.

Not enough time, too many things to do.

Where do we even begin?

Of course, explore burnout in Keybase and Coda, but seriously, how do we make sense and grapple with this question?


SPEAKER_03:
Focus is, I guess, maybe one of the ways you can tackle that one.


SPEAKER_00:
tech fails yes absolutely or just tech friction or any other kind of phenomena um everything can and will happen and so it can be and we also have kind of two modes of dealing with it within the weekend we have the tooling support and the direct email contact if something's not working for you so that's one

If there's an issue, how can we solve it in the moment?

And then there's the deeper time iteration where in just, it's hard to believe and it won't feel like four weeks, but in four weeks, we're going to have a heartbeat.

And so there's going to be some stuff that we can resolve just by time of the next heartbeat, which is open for anybody who wants to co-organize, by the way.

might be other aspects of tech or of the organization or communication that we can implement by september like which we start on organizing right after this one like it start in may basically for organizing for september and then there'll be other ones which we can fix in 2023 and there'll be other ones that we can have resolved or ameliorated or elaborated upon by 2033 so it just depends how much and how will people be involved in that feedback loop

which starts with just mentioning something, but then continues all the way up through like being that change if somebody really wants to make it happen.

So yeah, tech, okay.

Yes, please.


SPEAKER_01:
Coda's new for this Complexity Weekend, isn't it?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, last cohort, we didn't have Coda at all.

And this weekend, it's like a central piece for how all this information on people and on the program, the information, the ability to have teams and to see in real time which teams are forming.

This is like all things that we didn't have last time.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

Tech seems to be like a constant source of friction because it's changing.

We're changing, you know, so it's always iterative.

That's definitely a be patient in the moment.

If you're in a facilitated session, for example, and stuff goes awry, people's computers freeze, whatever.

I know it can be really frustrating.

And then if you've got suggestions about how we can improve tech next time around,

That is definitely something we're always looking at.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

So English language and cultural references.

This is also super important for people to keep in mind, even though this is at the moment an English language conversation.

But we hope that people can find each other and connect in whatever context.

format and as we grow and especially between events we can connect to different communities and so that's like an opportunity that exists again as something that could be suggestion or somebody can be like a change maker and help us connect to a different domain or practice or language it's just about really the bandwidth of the people who are involved in that event organizing so it's a way that people can not just suggest things but actually make them happen


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I wanted to talk about the English language point, because this actually came up in a pre weekend event, which I thought was really interesting.

It was, you know, we want to be a deep time community of practice, we want people to step up into organizing and helping our community grow and improve over time.

And I don't know if the technology exists for it now, but hopefully in deep time, it will, it would be really great to figure out, you know, how can we

actually live by our value of inclusivity and accessibility and make it where English isn't required to participate, right?

Maybe there's some technology that we could implement in the tech stack that allows everyone to get a little earpiece and then kind of like the UN or whatever, right?

When somebody talks in another language, it translates in a couple seconds in your ear.

If that ever exists in a way that we can incorporate and ship it to every participant or however it ends up working out and people are welcome to step up and help us do that,

think that would be amazing you know to to really um look at some of these tensions and frictions and and and figure out how to tackle the complex issues and you know improve that part of the solution thank you sean conversations about values and mission i feel like this is we've kind of touched on this is that the the kind of the western mindset and like western


SPEAKER_01:
idiosyncrasies are kind of the default, like, you know, the gather space looks a little bit like a hotel conference center.

And I think that we're just beginning to deal with, you know, I know I've been part of conversations about de-westernizing the internet and what would that look like?

and i think that that we're that you know that we have this you know english centered and kind of like western mind view here just because of the people that have been organizers but i don't think that that's part of our values and i think that that's something that we would love to um collaborate with people on and have them join leadership

to help us because we're limited by our lifetime experiences to expand that space.

Because I just think that it'll make what we're doing with Complexity Weekend so much richer and so much more robust and so much more active if we can bring this kind of cultural,

spectrum you know through cultural variability in and you know into our practice so if anybody you know okay i know i'm always putting out a call for like feedback but it's just so important that we have this iterative relationship and i think that that's that it's something that we've identified uh on the in the organizers um and are just beginning to tackle so i think it's valid


SPEAKER_00:
so that thank you jen brings us to the end of this stream so well played jen and sean and appreciation really to everybody who who makes these jam boards and events happen so

We can now head over to the PSSOT.

So Sean dropped the link in the chat again, but again, this is the one PSSOT.

And on the third tab, weekend program, that's where we can have the weekend program.

You can find out what to do asynchronously or synchronously at any time.

We are finishing the live stream and we are about to head into this next session where just a few minutes after the hour, we're going to kick it off with the first one-on-one session.

So that's it for the live stream and see you and gather in just a few minutes.

Thank you.

Bye.


SPEAKER_02:
Bye.