SPEAKER_00:
hello it's paper stream 4.0 this is daniel friedman on february 6 2023 today we're going to be giving a dot zero background and context

stream for the paper sparse and stereotyped encoding implicates a core glomerulus for ant alarm behavior the authors are taylor hart dominic frank lindsey lopes lenora olivo cisneros kip lacey warring tribble amelia ritger stephanie valdez rodriguez and daniel kronauer this is a paper a pre-print that was uploaded to bio archive

on December 29th, 2022.

There are going to be two main goals for this .Zero presentation.

First, to learn about cutting edge ant neuroscience, and also to prepare for an upcoming Linksphere lab meeting.

And some of the key terms that'll have a consistent color scheme are transgenic ants in red, antennolob glomeruli in green, and alarm pheromones in blue.

So let's get into it.

Here's some of the big questions that might bring somebody to being interested in this paper.

First, what can we learn and do with transgenic ants?

What is the extent of stereotypy in the ant brain?

In other words, how much similarity is there in the neural circuitry in the ant brain within and across colonies?

And, importantly, for the empirical basis of this paper, how does the antennal lobe glomeruli process alarm pheromones?

Here's the abstract of the paper.

Ants communicate via large arrays of pheromones and possess expanded, highly complex olfactory systems, with antennal lobes in the brain comprising about 500 glomeruli.

This expansion implies that odors could activate hundreds of glomeruli, which would pose challenges for higher-order processing.

To study this problem, we generated the first transgenic ants, expressing the genetically encoded calcium indicator GCaMP6S in olfactory sensory neurons.

Using two-photon imaging, we mapped complete glomerular responses to four ant alarm pheromones.

Alarm pheromones robustly activated equal to or fewer than six glomeruli, and activity maps for the three pheromones inducing panic alarm in our study species converge on a single glomerulus.

These results demonstrate that, rather than using broadly tuned combinatorial encoding, ANTs employ precise, narrowly tuned, and stereotyped representation of alarm pheromone cues.

The identification of a central sensory hub, glomerulus, for alarm behavior suggests that a simple neural architecture is sufficient to translate pheromone perception into behavioral outputs.

so that's the big picture of this paper it's where they're going they're recognizing the complexity of the ant olfactory system they are introducing the first transgenic ants which we're going to talk more about during today's session

They took images of the ant brain with the abilities that they had to observe neural activity because of the transgenic ants.

And they demonstrated that at least in the case of alarm behavior, that there's a small subset of glomeruli, about six or fewer out of 500, that are activated

and are able to be associated with the alarm behavior response.

So here are the keywords and some images of the study species.

The study species is Ooceraea bireoi, also known as the clonal radar ant.

Some keywords are antennal lobe, transgenic ants, alarm behavior, calcium imaging, chemosensation, communication, GCaMP,

odor coding olfaction and pheromone we're going to get to all of these terms and topics along the way here is the roadmap and one great thing about the pre-print format in this paper is we have the distance markers with line numbers so numbers are going to be representing what line in the document these sections begin on

The paper begins on line 33 with an introduction.

Line 104 is the results section, and the results are a sequence of findings from the basic behavioral on through the creation of transgenic ants and their characterization in sections 2.2 and 2.3.

some microscopy where they record the responses of neural regions to different stimuli in 2.4 2.5 and 2.6 section 3 is the discussion on line 343 section 4 materials and methods starting on line 561

talking about behavioral methods, the generation of transgenic ant methods, phenotyping transgenic ants, and in vivo calcium imaging.

Then section five, supplemental information, titles and legends.

Line 942, there are supplementary videos, two of them, supplementary tables, three of them, and supplemental figures, nine of them.

And then finally, the references on line 1059.

So let's jump in.

The paper begins with the following lines.

Eusocial insects, like ants and honeybees, use vast arrays of pheromones to communicate information with conspecifics and to regulate colony life.

These adaptations correspond to elaborations of the chemosensory system, which are particularly striking in ants.

And no citation is provided here.

It's basic and background information.

So I wanted to highlight a recent perspective written by Tim Linksvare and Brian Johnson, rethinking the social ladder approach for elucidating the evolution and molecular basis of insect societies.

And it's a really important figure that has a lot to be explored.

On the top left of the figure,

is a representation of a fallacious understanding of social complexity so across all panels in the figure the y-axis is going to represent some trait and the x-axis is going to represent some other trait so for example the complexity or the level of distinctiveness amongst different morphological casts on the y-axis and on the x-axis another trait commonly associated with social complexity like colony size but

there's multiple traits not just two however it's shown in two dimensions to be flat on the page and on the top left quadrant we see a fallacious understanding of what sociality and you sociality mean from a complexity perspective and the fallacious understanding is that these increasingly complex

tiers of eusociality can be ranked in a linear way solitary sub-social is more social incipiently eusocial is more primitive eusociality and advanced eusociality is like the top of a ladder like a scala natura which we talked about in the previous paper stream here applied to social complexity

And part of the issue is that when this is implicitly or explicitly used as a social ladder of complexity, we get all of these fallacious experiments, hypotheses, and models.

We can always trace this path that makes it look like that is the way that some species that are advanced eusocials have evolved.

But unfortunately, that's not how things are.

rather when we superimpose the phylogeny on these species in trait space so its location in the x and y is its phenotype value on these two social complexity dimensions and then superimposed is the phylogeny we find that rather than being a social ladder rather we can see that there are these multi-dimensional phenotype spaces

The different traits associated with social complexity are not linearly correlated necessarily with each other.

And the phylogeny, especially when we're considering across multiple subgroups of bees and ants and so on, we find that there's actually a lot of interesting trajectories through this space.

So that kind of rigorous modeling is enabled by taking a data-driven approach to the evolution of social complexity rather than

a fallacious and dogmatic understanding where different species can be linearly ranked according to their sociality continuing with the abstract sorry the introduction insect olfactory systems have a conserved organization with olfactory sensory neurons osn in peripheral sensory neurons innervating glomeruli in the antennal lobes al's in the brain

Much of the detailed knowledge of insect olfactory system development, anatomy, and neural function comes from studies of the vinegar fly Drosophila melanogaster.

So here's Drosophila melanogaster down there on the left, and here's some of those citations, Strausfield, Vossel, and Zhao.

And here's drawing from this Zhao and McBride 2020 Evolution of Olfactory Circuits in Insects.

On the right here, we have a schematic of the way that odor processing happens in the insect brain.

The peripheral organ here, we can think of as the antenna.

So here's bristles or antenna.

And these OSNs, olfactory sensory neurons, have receptors for different chemicals.

They have different receptors that respond to different chemicals.

those neurons project through the antennal nerve and they terminate in the antennal lobe the antennal lobe contains these clusters that look like compressed grapes called glomeruli and

continue on projecting through the mushroom body onto the lateral horn which is how the sensory input play important roles in behavior so this is a schematic of how the olfactory sensory neurons for example in the antenna pass on to the antenna lobe and then on through the higher order processing aspects of the insect brain and here's another image from that paper

that highlights what we do and don't know from Drosophila.

So here we have an image of Drosophila melandigaster, and it's being composed with two other Drosophila species that have a divergence time of several million years, Drosophila simulans and Drosophila secellia.

and here is some images that we're going to see similar ones from an ant brain coming up where the antennal lobe is getting projections from the antenna and we can look at different glomeruli clusters inside of the antennal lobe and look at how there's variation within and across species and we can explore how those different glomeruli respond to different odorants

So for example, in section E here on this figure, we have melanogaster simulans in Sechelia, and then the responsivity to different categories of sense along the columns.

Those are the kinds of things that people have studied in Drosophila, facilitated by a lot of transgenics, a lot of genetics tools in Drosophila melanogaster, and also increasingly in other Drosophilids.

However, ants possess an order of magnitude more odorant receptor genes, ORs, and antennal lobe glomeruli than Drosophila.

lots of citations are provided here so highlighting this benton 2022 citation drosophila olfaction past present and future from 14th of december 2022 so pretty recent and it's a example of the the beautiful types of 3d reconstructions that are possible with the amount of study that's been brought to bear on drosophila melanogaster

so here we have the antennal lobe and the different glomeruli are shown and the different cells and how they touch have been well mapped in the antennal lobe and how those antennal lobes pass through and project on to the mushroom body and lateral horn which was shown schematically here

That's what is known from Drosophila.

And we can summarize what's known in Drosophila and contrast it with what is less known but still established in ants.

However, ants possess an order of magnitude

more odorant receptor genes and AL glomeruli than Drosophila.

Let's look at Ferguson et al.

2021, the most recent of the ant citations.

This is advances in the study of olfaction and eusocial ants by Ferguson et al.

And here is a canonical insect brain partitioned down the middle to contrast eusocial ants with solitary flies.

so eusocial ants have around 400 odorant receptor genes while as drosophila have around 60 genes so these are loci that encode receptors and it's variable across the 15 000 ant species these are just rough numbers provided ants have greater than 7 000 sensilla per flagellum so they have higher density of sensing bristles and importantly

ants have around 400 antennal lobe glomeruli.

So it's like 400 little grapes in a cluster, whereas the Drosophila have around 60 antennal lobe glomeruli.

So there's an increase in the genomic complexity and size, as well as in the neurophysiological complexity in ants.

And also quite interestingly, the ants have a dual olfactory pathway involving this orange loop.

So that's something we could talk about

The authors write, here we focus on the neural representation of alarm pheromones, danger signals that are chemically well characterized across several ant species.

Stimulating individuals with volatile alarm pheromones is experimentally simple and quickly elicits behavioral responses, which makes these pheromones attractive models for studying the neurobiological basis of chemical communication.

Upon perception of the pheromone, locomotion usually increases and aggression or panic commences.

And that first citation there is to Wilson and Regnier, 1971, from American Naturalist.

and just showing on this slide some cool images from that paper some drawings of ant bodies and different chemicals that were extracted from different glands and also looking at how those glands differ in their morphology across different species

and also the comparison of multiple formica and a can of mypes species in terms of the morphology so it's the kind of work that was being done in the 1970s and these topics are still being studied to this day all right to position the paper and try to understand why the authors took the angle that they took

Alarm pheromone representation has been investigated using calcium dyes to record neural activity from subsections of the antenna lobe in several carpenter ant species.

These studies found broad, multiglomerular activation patterns without evidence for specialized glomerular clusters,

similar to the combinatorial representation of general odin's in drosophila so previously people had used injected chemical dyes to measure neural activity in ants and bees and found that the activation of the hundreds of glomeruli was quote broad which is similar to what is seen in the drosophila glomeruli

Such a combinatorial model with broad tuning implies odor mixtures could potentially activate combinations of hundreds of glomeruli in the expanded ANT antennal lobe.

Because the number of potential combinations of glomeruli grows super-linearly with each additional glomerulus, this scenario poses much bigger challenges for higher-order neurons in ANTs versus Drosophila with respect to decoding multi-component olfactory signals.

detecting and identifying pheromones and activating appropriate behavioral responses.

In contrast, narrower tuning, where most odorants only activate a small number of glomeruli, could simplify the neural architecture necessary for processing odor information in the complex olfactory environment of an ant colony and ensure that pheromone signals can be rapidly and accurately perceived.

So the authors are positing,

that to have broad responsivity of the antenna lobe glomeruli would seem to be a complex cognitive task.

In contrast, blue, there might be a narrower tuning, something more like a sparse representation or a lasso regression,

where most of the glomeruli are inactive but a small subset are very strongly activated it is hypothesized that such a sparse neural activity pattern which is called a representation here could simplify the neural architecture necessary for processing odor information in the complex olfactory environment of an ant colony

And they write, consistent with this alternative model is the relatively narrow tuning observed for at least some ant olfactory receptors.

So there's some evidence that that's the case.

And that's one of the big questions that they're going to pursue, which is, does the ant alarm pheromone response rest upon the broad activation of many glomeruli?

Or does it rest upon the strong and specific activation of a subset of glomeruli?

They also wrote,

Whether the level of anatomical functional stereotypy of the ant olfactory glomeruli more closely resembles Drosophila or mice has not been assessed.

However, the number of glomeruli in ants varies with sex, caste, and worker body size, suggesting that stereotypy may be low.

So, it's unknown how stereotypical the ant neural architectures are within and across species.

However, neural volumes and structures are variable with nestmate morphology and developmental phenotypes, suggesting that stereotypy may be low.

So these are two of the main questions that the authors are pursuing.

First one, how does the antenna lobe process the alarm pheromone?

And second, how stereotypical are those circuits that enable that processing?

The authors write, we studied the representation of alarm pheromones in the clonal raider ant, Oocerea birei, an experimentally tractable species that lives in small colonies, reproduces asexually, and preys on other ants.

we implemented the first neurogenetic tools in ants by developing a piggyback transgenesis protocol to generate lines that express the genetically encoded calcium indicator GCaMP6S in olfactory sensory neurons.

So,

throwback because here was a paper i wrote with my phd advisor deborah gordon and our colleague lee chin lo in 2017 and this paper was entitled the mutants are here and it was a special issue not an official special issue is special for us because there were two papers

were published by two different groups that both presented some of the first genetic knockouts in ants and so this top paper is the treble at all paper cited by the authors orco mutagenesis causes loss of antenna lobe glomeruli and impaired social behavior in ants

and there was a group also working on knocking out the orcogene the odorant co-receptor gene and they were working in the ant species harpignathus saltator and of note

Both of these ant species have a somewhat unconventional life histories.

So in the clonal raider ant, as its name suggests, it reproduces asexually.

So in this case, into the diploid female, it's possible to

inject a Cas9 guide RNA mixture that results in in this case a knockout of one or both copies of the locus and then whether it's a heterozygous knockout or a homozygous knockout that line can be asexually propagated

So those lines can just be continued to be expanded asexually through cloning.

That's a relatively unconventional life history as far as ants go, because usually ants reproduce sexually.

Harpignathus has a different lifestyle, but also an unconventional one as far as ants go.

And what happened here is they injected the eggs with the Cas9 guide RNA mixture, and that results in an adult, which in this case, it's shown as a heterozygote.

Harpicnathus, it's possible for nestmates who are born more like a worker in the context of a queenless colony to then regain their fertility, what's called a gamergate.

And so in this case, after they identify which nestmates have gotten a homozygous or heterozygous knockout, they then

help those nest mates ascend to reproductive female or gamergate status and then cross them to a hemizygous male adult males are haploid in the ants and that results in these lines propagating forth that are either heterozygous or homozygous for the knockout

so these two species have somewhat unconventional life histories but both were being used at exactly the same time to develop the first knockouts now it's easier to knock something out in the genome to break something than it is to insert something and so the paper that we're discussing today heart at all that's the first paper that actually has done transgenesis in the context of neurogenetic tooling

rather than just demonstrating proof of concept that you can knock out a relevant gene.

So this paper is going to implement those neurogenetic tools and then examine the relationships between the behavioral outputs of alarm pheromone stimuli and single glomerulus resolution, whole antenna lobe calcium responses for four ant pheromones.

So that's the positioning of the paper.

Ants are awesome.

Their olfaction is awesome.

There are two big questions that they want to resolve.

First, how does the antenna lobe process alarm pheromone stimuli?

And second, what are the extent and type of stereotypy in the ant brain?

Previously, in two ant species, it's been possible to do knockouts, but no one has published truly transgenic ants where something is being added into the genome.

Let's go to the results.

We're gonna go through the results by walking through their figures.

So first, figure one, behavioral responses to four ant-alarm pheromones.

In A, they're presenting the chemical structure of four ant-alarm pheromones and the vehicle control.

So pentane is the control, and then they're showing a handful of chemicals that they are going to use.

b is the alarm bioassay so this is representing the lopez et al 2022 paper and this was a behavioral study where they assessed the stereotypy of the alarm response and so when the stimulus is added at t0 and c and d then they put in a piece of paper with some of this chemical added and then they can check

As a function of time, what proportion of the nest mates are outside the nest pile?

And what proportion of time is spent outside of the initial nest chamber?

And the alarm pheromone response in both cases, you can see strongly induces the nest mates to leave the nest pile and get outside of the nest chamber over the minutes after the alarm pheromone is dropped in.

And different responses to alarm pheromone are shown in E, such as immediate panic, ants leaving the nest, or no initial response for the control.

And in F, they say quantification of the length of time that the original nest pile remained intact in the bioassays from C and D. See table S2 for details.

So here's table S2.

and they're showing some statistics so some of the comparisons have a p-value close to one not significantly different other comparisons are very strong difference for example the control versus the blend through all those alarm smells together you get a super strong difference

So they've established that these chemicals can induce the alarm response in terms of evacuation and moving around.

Now they're going to do a transgene construction and GCaMP6 as expression.

So some of you may be very familiar with transgenics molecular biology, others may not be.

So I thought it was kind of cool to look at what they built and what they did, why?

So first,

this is a strand of DNA along the x-axis and here it's shown from 3' to 5' that's referring to the sides of the DNA base pair and TR are terminal repeats so there's a 3' and a 5' terminal repeat

And just speaking broadly, terminal repeats help with in vivo, so in the cell, and in vitro, that's in the test tube, mechanisms related to replication and transposition, operations that are metaphorically or mechanistically cut, paste, copy, pinch, open, align, amplify, and so on.

So those are kind of like the bookends or the handles of this section of DNA.

And in terms of its overall length, here the bar is 1,000 base pairs, 1 KB, and so it's potentially 10,000 base pairs long.

Line 152.

Because we did not know if GCaMP6S would be detectable in live animals, we included an expression construct with a baculovirus-derived IE1 enhancer promoter element to drive broad expression of the red fluorescent protein DS-RED.

based on similar designs used in Drosophila melanogaster and Bombix mori, other insect species that have good transgenics.

So the most upstream element in this construct is a promoter enhancer with broad activity.

So an enhancer increases gene expression and a promoter is where the RNA polymerase is able to bind and start to transcribe a protein-coding locus.

So this should drive broad expression, like in all cells of the soma, a red fluorescent protein.


UNKNOWN:
143.


SPEAKER_00:
The odorant receptor, co-receptor, ORCO,

is expressed specifically in all o-burial odorant sensory neurons.

So ORCO is a co-receptor of olfactory receptors.

So remember that ants had around 400 of these odorant receptors.

Each one of them form a heterodimer in the antenna where there's one copy of ORCO and one copy of an odorant receptor, and they're like a functional pair.

We reasoned that transgenic ants expressing GCaMP under the control of an ORCO promoter could allow optical recording of neural activity in olfactory sensory neurons, afferents, parts moving away from, in the antenna lobe similar to other insects.

therefore cloned a 2.4 thousand base pair genomic fragment upstream of the oberoi orcogene which presumably contained promoter and enhancer elements sufficient to derive expression in clonal radar olfactory sensor neurons fragment ober orca and this is the kind of work also that i was doing in drosophila in undergraduate which was looking at upstream genomic fragments and testing

which fragments had enhancers sufficient to drive expression in different spatial temporal patterns.

We then constructed a piggyback vector plasmid where OBIR-ORCO, that's this gray region, which again, presumably contains the transcription factor binding sites and cis-regulatory elements that are important for driving proper expression of ORCO.

And instead of driving ORCO, now it's going to drive expression of GCaMP6S.

They're going to use the QF2 and 15X-QUAS binary expression driver and effector elements in tandem to amplify transgene expression.

So QF2 and 15 of the QUAS and this SV40 element, this is not a blue fluorescent protein, rather this is a expression system so that the downstream locus

is going to be expressed according to the enhancer elements from this gray area which again are ostensibly in olfactory sensory neurons

Although we generated several separate transgenic lines, we recovered a large and stable population only for the line derived from the first set of injections, and this line was therefore used for all later experiments.

First four rows, table one.

Henceforth, we referred to these ants as GCaMP6S ants.

And so here is table one.

So you can see how many eggs they injected.

1945, 1367, 739, so multiple rounds, but in the end only the first experiments worked, but you only need it to work once.

And so what exactly is this GCaMP6s payload?

Well, the protein itself is shown on the bottom right, and here's from Wikipedia.

GCaMP is a genetically encoded calcium indicator initially developed in 2001.

It's a synthetic fusion of a green fluorescent protein, GFP, calmodulin, and M13, a peptide sequence from myosin light chain kinase.

When bound to calcium,

GCaMP fluoresces green with a peak excitation wavelength of 480 nanometers and a peak emission wavelength of 510 nanometers.

It is used in biological research to measure intracellular CA2 levels, both in vitro and in vivo using virally transfected or transgenic cell and animal lines.

And that's exactly how it's going to be used here, which is, again, to highlight the mechanism, when there's low calcium,

the protein is not lit.

When there's high calcium, the protein emits a green fluorescent color.

And so as calcium levels changing are associated with neural activity, expressing GCaMP in neurons allows you to then look for the green light and use that as a proxy of neural activity.

So figure two, B through F.

That was figure 2A with just the construct.

Just wanted to highlight that.

Figure 2B through F. So first, figure 2B.

B, transgene expression is easily visible in pupa viewed under epifluorescence.

GCamp 6S in green on the top.

This is just the antenna glowing green.

DS Red bottom.

That's the broad expression of the red.

And so the reason why they put in the red at all was because they weren't sure how bright the GCamp would be.

And so they wanted to have an easy way of just putting the whole Petri dish under the light and finding out which ones were glowing red.

C, anti-GFP, so here they're doing an antibody against GFP, also colored green, and an antibody against ORCO in magenta, and they're showing that they're both labeling the same cells, the same OSN cells.

D, GCaMP and anti-ORCO signal co-localize in the antenna lobes.

So here is the brain's contour, this kind of heart shape, and here is the overlap between the GCaMP signal and the ORCO signal.

E, all glomeruli are stained by anti-sinorph.

So this is like a broad scale neural protein.

Whereas anti-GFP labeling of GCaMP6S is strong in other AL glomeruli, the signal is weak or absent in the T7 glomeruli and absent in the antennal mechanosensory and motor center, ANMC.

So there's some regions that are not being innervated.

And they show that unilateral ablation of the antenna from the scape, so cutting the antenna off the head of the ant, eliminates GCaMP6S green and anti-ORCO from the antenna lobe, indicating that GCaMP6S signal in the antenna lobe derives exclusively from sensory neurons in the antenna.

So that is very striking results.

And it's consistent with their earlier work showing that loss of ORCO resulted in changes in antenna lobe morphology.

Now they're showing this asymmetrical relationship where ablating the neuron

removes the expression of GCaMP6S and ORCO in that hemisphere so all the activity that was lighting up earlier in this bilateral image that was being driven by the antennal neurons OSN projecting in so this is supporting that the transgene is expressing in olfactory sensory neurons and it's expressing in the appropriate patterns

Examination of brains from GCaMP6S ants showed high levels of GCaMP6S in the antenna lobe, where it co-localizes with ORCO, which labels OSN afferents, figure 2D.

Here.

GCaMP6S is also expressed in parts of the sub-esophageal zone in the central complex.

So they're just pointing to the fact that there's a few other regions that are also expressing this transgene.

And so that's pretty interesting to see just cool ant brain images.

Line 193.

Expression of genetically encoded calcium indicators can alter cellular calcium buffering and affect behavior.

We therefore examined whether the GCaMP6S ants had defects that could be relevant to the study of alarm pheromone sensation.

We manually segmented the antenna lobe of a GCaMP6S ant and counted a total of 505 glomeruli.

So that's what it looks like in figure S4a.

This is within the range of wild type ants, which is 493 to 509 glomeruli, showing that gross antenna lobe anatomy of transgenic ants is normal.

So on the left, they counted just one really high quality image of a transgenic ant, and they showed it has a, at least at the macro level, looks all good.

And then B, GCaMP6S animals leave the nest in response to 4-methyl-3-heptanone, 4-methyl-3-heptanol, and a 9-to-1 blend of the two.

so in b and c we're going to see the behavioral results showing that not just do those antennal lobes and the transgenic ants look broadly normal but also they're leaving the nest and breaking away from the nest pile in response to the alarm pheromone pretty much like you'd expect so brain looks normal behavior looks pretty normal seems like they're at least in the right area this is figure three a and b

So here is their experimental setup for observing the neural activity.

A, a whole animal is adhered to a plastic base with glue applied to the ventral side of the head and thorax.

Antenna are restrained with a strip of paraffin directly in front of the air tube.

So they're kind of tying down the antenna and then they're going to have it in front of this tube that is going to pass odors over them.

and then this is the preparation after dissection with the cuticle and glandular tissue removed to expose the right antennal lobe so this is an immobilized ant they've chipped away at the top of its head they've pulled away the cuticle the exoskeleton and they pull away the glandular tissue that surrounds the brain possibly some muscle too and then they're able to then look directly into the antennal lobe here's what they see

Figure C, appearance of a single optical slice through the antenna lobe using two photon microscopy showing the raw fluorescence.

So they're able to take images of the light coming out of the antenna lobe in response to a photon being shot in there.

response to ethyl pyrazine which is going to activate the antennal lobe just broadly it's a smell so they find that the ethyl pyrazine within 10 to 20 seconds of being presented has this multiple fold change in the brightness coming out of the antennal lobe D is a time series

the one we were just looking at.

E, volumetric imaging of clonal radar antenna lobes showing a max X projection or max Z projection, which is kind of like collapsing a Z stack all down.

So these images are taken in slices.

and then you can collapse them back down.

And F, general odorants, generate calcium response patterns that are qualitatively similar across individuals.

Would have been interesting to see some correlations or some alignments here, but 3-hexanone has this broad activity pattern.

Ethylpyrazine, we see these two clusters.

Isopropanol, at least one cluster here.

So there's some similarities.

with the same chemical across multiple ants.

And three, responses to 3-hexanone are detectable throughout the ventral and medial antennal lobe.

So these are some slices, some Z stacks of different depth.

And

Couldn't resist the joke.

What is this?

Is it an fMRI for ants?

So how cool will it be when we can do statistical parametric mapping and active inference on ants?

not so far away.

Figure four.

Now they're going to zoom in on the alarm pheromones and look at how the alarm pheromones are represented in the antennal lobe.

And A is their experimental design, their odor stimulus regime.

They're going to test four alarm pheromone concentrations in total.

0.75%, 3%, 12%, and 48%.

And each individual ant is exposed to two of the four possible concentrations.

So it's kind of like a block design.

B, the paraffin oil vehicle does not generate calcium responses.

So that's good.

And then C and D, they're showing for two ants in D or one ant in C, different activation patterns.

So blue is the background and then increasingly bright colors represent brighter and brighter activation represented by light coming out of the antenna lobe.

We observed higher numbers of responding glomeruli with increased concentration, but even at the highest concentration tested, the four pheromones activated a median of only six or fewer glomeruli, figure S7.

So here on the y-axis of all of these plots, we have the number of responding glomeruli, and then on the x-axis of all these plots, we have the concentration of the scent used, 0.753, 12, and 48%.

and what they're showing is that even for very high concentrations we're still only seeing a few glomeruli activated so even for the scents that cause the alarm and panic behavior even when it's totally being flooded at almost 50 percent concentration still sometimes only one or two or three glomeruli are being activated and so

They're going to now characterize and describe a little bit more about those glomeruli clusters.

Figure 5, a glomerular cluster with stereotyped spatial organization and robust responses to alarm pheromone.

So, A, whole antennal lobe activation patterns for alarm pheromones overlap in several glomeruli.

Three focal glomeruli are outlined.

And those are going to be called panic glomerulus alcohol, PGA.

panic glomerulus broad pgb and six methyl five hepten two own glomerulus or 6g b is a single optical slice through the antenna lobe with the three focal glomeruli outlined shown with the outline in red

c time series of calcium responses in pgb pga and 6g so here are those three regions in the three rows here

and then the four chemicals in the column the x-axis is the time series and so this is a lot like an fMRI it's showing the differences in the time kinetics and in the responsivity of these different pheromones and there's a lot of interesting patterns to look at for example like the reduction of activity

in the 6G glomerulus in response to all the chemicals except for the 6-methyl heptanone.

Pretty cool.

And then D, vectors of spatial displacement between the centers of PGB and PGA and between PGB and 6G, top and bottom, show that the spatial relationships are conserved across individuals.

So this is a little bit of a computational neuroanatomy or neuromorphology analysis, which is exactly what SPM specializes in, showing that there's some stereotypy in how these two

and three regions are related to each other in pairwise and in three-way relationships.

So they've characterized the time course dynamics

They've shown that it's only a subset of glomeruli that respond even strongly and that those strongly responding glomeruli have a stereotypical anatomical arrangement.

And so getting towards their conclusion and summaries, the median number and position of responding glomeruli for each pheromone in combination with a pheromone's behavioral outputs allow us to outline a conceptual schematic of alarm pheromone representation in the antenna lobe, figure six.

The three pheromones with overlapping calcium response patterns all robustly elicited panic alarm behavior while 6-methyl-5-heptan-2-one did not elicit panic alarm behavior and generated a non-overlapping response.

These findings point to a shared pathway for eliciting panic alarm behavior centered on P, G, B. So, figure six.

It's a conceptual schematic for the representation of alarm pheromone in the clonal rater ant and tantalope.

Numbers show the median number of responding glomeruli for each pheromone combination using the highest combination tested.

So that's 48%, and they tested N equals eight ants at this concentration.

The three pheromones that elicit panic alarm responses, 4-methyl-3-heptonone, that's the purple,

4-methyl-3-heptanol that's the orange and 4-methyl-3-hexanol in the kind of magenta color activate mutually overlapping sets of glomeruli while 6-methyl-5-heptan-2-one this green color activates a mutually exclusive response in a separate glomerulus pgb

panic glomerulus broad is indicated on the diagram according to its response function so pretty cool they're showing that there's this one overlapping glomerulus that's activated by all three and so this is just the beginning of understanding the many to many relationships and mappings between odorants

glomerular activation, and behavior consequences, but it's an incredible step along that way.

So congratulations to the authors and appreciate that they've shared the work this way.

discussion just to summarize in this study we pioneered the combination of a genetically encoded calcium indicator with volumetric two photon imaging to study social insect neurobiology this allowed us to address long-standing questions about pheromone representation in the ant and tunnel lobe stereotypy in the ant olfactory system which resembles mammals in terms of complexity has not been previously examined

We mapped a cluster of three antennilobe glomeruli across individual clone orator ants and found that they have consistent positions, spatial organization, and odor-evoked response functions.

PGB, PGA, and 6G glomeruli always had the same relative positions and occurred at similar distances from one another.

Ant antenna lobes thus possess a high degree of spatial conservation at the scale of individual glomeruli, suggesting that, similar to Drosophila, axon targeting by olfactory sensory neurons can be stereotyped despite the vastly increased complexity of the olfactory system.

So some more summaries.

The proportion of glomeruli that robustly responded to any alarm pheromone was very small, with a maximum of only six glomeruli displaying robust activation out of about 500 total.

contrary to previous studies on social insects the sparse activation shows that alarm pheromones are in fact encoded by a small number of glomeruli similar to ecologically relevant chemicals in drosophila and moths such as sex pheromones and aversive compounds including co2 and the microbial odorant geomosin so it's important to keep in mind while that may be the case for alarm pheromones

sex pheromones and CO2, it might not necessarily be the case for food or for nestmate recognition, but it's a data point nonetheless.

This sparse encoding logic could be advantageous by reducing the computational task for responding to molecules indicative of danger, despite the complex olfactory environment of an ant colony.

using sparse encoding for sensory signals could decrease the probability of odor mixtures activating hundreds of glomeruli simultaneously reducing the need for vast numbers of neural connections for decoding highly combinatorial signals and so a great discussion question is

What are the other computational, cognitive, and operational trade-offs associated with sparsity?

Because there's some benefits, and that's why human statisticians have developed lasso regression and sparse representations, but also it's not unilaterally better.

There's some times where you do want to actually reflect high information signals with combinatorial activation.

We also found that the temporal dynamics of calcium responses differed by odor and glomerulus.

These features provide additional information that olfactory systems can use to interpret sensory inputs, including mixtures of odors.

So that's a cool future direction.

All right, and getting to some closing questions.

What else can be done with this line of ants, this GCaMP orc ober?

What other lines of oberoi might be interesting to make?

What might it take to get such a genetic system running in another ant species?

What life histories are amenable to genetics and transgenics in ants?

What genomic insertions or modifications might be interesting in which ants and bees?

And what other behavioral and genomics methods are you curious about in ants and bees?

so pretty quick pretty awesome paper again awesome to see that the years since 2017 have been active for the Cronauer lab always leading the way with excellent ant research and

yeah a big paper and big day for transgenic ants indeed mutants are here so looking forward to discussing this with lynx failure lab and with you all thanks for watching and see you later