SPEAKER_20:
Thank you.


UNKNOWN:
Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Bye.

Thank you.

Thank you.

so

Thank you.

Thank you.

so so

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_28:
Greetings, everyone.

Hello.

Welcome to Sunday morning.

Looks like the live stream is going.

So, Sean, take it away.


SPEAKER_18:
Sure.

Welcome back, everyone.

This is day three of Complexity Weekend.

This is the big finale.

We're very excited to see all the teams that formed yesterday and really get into the weeds today with these teams.

So one thing I want to highlight kind of right out the gate is we are a global cohort this year.

And so I really want us to be conscious of, you know, we live on this sphere and the sphere turns.

Some parts are lit up.

Some parts aren't.

People are sleeping right now that we're checking out the key base last night.

Try to be really inclusive of people.

These are all the responses for everyone who registered early.

Right.

Lots of different countries.

Right.

So we've got Spain, Portugal, Italy, Mongolia.

you know, Germany, Ukraine, just really keep in mind that there are people all across this globe that want to help.

So try to find, kind of source these people into your teams today if you can, or just support them as they go through the team formation process as well, kind of a phase from us.

And really I want to circle back to kind of the goals for the weekend hackathon.

So these are really kind of,

Three main points.

One of them was learning complexity science by doing.

And just to kind of check in on this, this is kind of a lifelong goal.

So I mean, this is just a weekend.

For some people, it's they're just getting into it for the first time.

You can just keep coming back and doing it.

You're never going to stop learning about it.

It penetrates lots of different areas of science, and you can just keep exploring all those different branches.

So that's a lifelong goal.

I'm just checking in on that.

The second one, everyone finds a team and where they feel valued and respected.

A lot of people did this yesterday, but it's not over.

I don't want to really articulate this.

This key base for our cohort is going to keep living on after this weekend.

So really, our goal is just anyone in this key base, whoever wants to find a team or wants mentorship or just wants to recruit people into an existing team, we will support that as much as possible whenever we see it come up in this space, including today, especially.

Working with people on projects you want to continue.

Now, that's something we're going to really focus on today with some key questions we're going to go over.

JP will go into it in a minute.

But basically, the way we're going to think about our teamwork today, we're trying to set it up so that these are projects people will want to continue or at least collaborative relationships that will want to continue.

People can continue working together and will really build this community of practice.

So two things I want people to do around these points right now is if you haven't found a teammate and you really want to be on one or start a team.

Post in hashtag I need a team right now.

Let's just get that conversation going.

Our facilitators are monitoring that.

We will make magic happen.

Just let us know what you want.

The second one for existing teams, can you actually do a roll call right now?

Can you post in general right now, did you work at all last night?

What is your progress so far?

What are you hoping to do today?

Just let us know you're alive and we'll take it from there.

Um, circling back to this question, that's kind of the center of this whole weekend, right?

What is complexity science?

We've been very resistant and giving any real top down answer to this.

And maybe some believe that it's hard to give a top down answer.

That's very satisfactory.

So, um, we're going to, again, crowdsource this from the bottom up and see what we think as a cohort about this question.

So the icebreaker today is revisiting complexity is from yesterday.

So if everyone remembers yesterday, we went on to the program and a participant info tab of the program, and we started filling out what we thought complexity was.

And it's different person to person.

It really depends kind of on your context a lot of the time, how that term is unpacked for the system you're looking at.

But there's a lot of great answers, right?

We saw iterated simplicity and rules, systems level order arising from individual level rules.

That was what people thought yesterday.

So really after reflecting on the whole macro lens of what happened this weekend, the different people you interacted with, the different teams you interacted with, all those conversations, all those interactions with people, process that information.

And I really want to take a moment now not only to bookmark this program if you haven't yet, but to go into this participant info tab right now.

I'm going to go there too.

Let's do that.

And then we will look together at this new column reflecting on the weekend as a whole.

I now think complexity is, and you don't have to answer now.

You can wait till the end.

You can answer now and change your answer, but try to think of any evolution at all of your conception of complexity, the concept, the way of practicing science, whatever you want to think about it and start populating this column H.

If you haven't populated this row yet, go ahead and populate the whole row.

Let people know about you so they know more about you and want to collaborate in the future.

So I'm going to leave this here for just 20 seconds.


SPEAKER_28:
Go for it.

Sean, how have your perceptions of complexity changed while people are getting a minute to answer?


SPEAKER_18:
My conception of complexity, I think really this take that it's hard to have a top-down satisfying definition of complexity that everyone just gets and it's like, yeah, that is it, the sum totality of a lot of approaches, really just how to account for interactions and systems.

I already went into this going in thinking it's hard to make that definition and I think that just got actually more solidified that it really is kind of a, there's pockets of definitions of complexity that really make sense and they link together into this broader approach to science.

So I think that just got, maybe I just got more cemented in that.

Let's see, anyone?

Oh, OK.

I'm going to check back because I think we're really going to focus on this evolutionary understanding of complexity over time.

So I'm definitely going to check back in with individuals and trying to make this delta happen so we can really learn from that.

So going back to the presentation.

All right.

So now, one last time, I'm going to go over kind of some of the tech we're going to be using.

We've used Jitsi for all three days now, but today in particular, you're going to be on Jitsi a lot with your teams.

And so something I really want to make sure people do is change your display name to be your first name and your Keybase username in parentheses.

That's a really great convention.

It lets people know who you are on Keybase so they can message you on that directly.

You can do that by either hitting the dot, dot, dot in the bottom right settings, the profile tab, and then change your display name.

or you can go to gallery view and double click your image and you can just change your name right there.

Now, if you have any issues with Keybase, Jitsi, any technology your team is thinking of using, post in tech support and we will have people there to help.

Another bit of conference tech we've been in and having fun with all weekend is Online Town.

It's still going.

It's our virtual water cooler.

You can be in there anytime.

You can just walk up to people, say hi.

It's super fun.

Be sure to change your display name, first name, and then key base username in parentheses.

It's a great convention across the board.

And you can also bookmark Online Town just so you can go back there anytime you just have downtime.

You want a break.

You want to get feedback.

It's a great place to be.

Now, the goal today is going to be performing as a team and just really trying to gel and find common answers to some difficult questions and really solidifying our approach and our questions and our problems that we're really focused on addressing.

And the thing we're all working toward today

is a deadline to basically share what your team has been working on all weekend and what you want to do as next steps.

So that will be at 1.30 PM PST.

So all of our activity up until then will be focused on that.

How will we deliver this and what feedback could we obtain to optimize that outcome?

So with that, I'm going to go ahead and pass it to our co-organizer, JP.

Take it away, JP.


SPEAKER_19:
All right.

How are we looking today?

Looks great, JP.

Great.

Nice to see everybody.

Nice to hear from everybody.

So today we're going to, you know, carry on the thread from yesterday and then wrap it all up with a nice bow so you can go on and do the performing part of the team formation progress.

So today we'll have office hours continuing.

Each team, I think we have more facilitators than teams.

So each team will get at least one facilitator and start from the Complexity Weekend Office Hours Hub, drop in there, and then we will create new Jitsi rooms as required.

So that'll be our general background or backbone for the day.

And again, as your teams are continuing on and as you're brainstorming ideas, remember to bring in or talk to relevant stakeholders.

And let us know if you need to be in touch with somebody.

We'll exploit our global network of not just experts, but our global network of connections across all scales to put you in touch with people who need to be talked to.

I think that's a very important thing.

To that effect, we can schedule calls with stakeholders this morning to make it happen.

So let's utilize as many resources as our now global mind has available.

And because we are this global mind, this last point, don't over intellectualize the problem.

I'm a fan of complex systems modeling from bottom up.

So you have simple rules leading to more complex things instead of the other way around where the best model of the world is the world.

So don't make assumptions about how things are.

That's a generally good framework for complexity modeling instead.

take a more curious approach to things.

This is also relevant for grounding.

And as you can tell, complexity gets a little bit heady.

So the relevant grounding is to actually give yourselves a concrete impact, something that's relevant for

something that's relevant and useful to everybody.

I think we could describe something like, what is the space of all possible mutations of biology in one way, but get down a little bit more, get down a little bit more specific to that.

Remember, we're trying to couch this all in the COVID-19 crisis.

So that's probably the,

the most important thing to remember.

We are in the midst of a global pandemic here.

So try to get down and make it relevant to those who might not be interested in the giant heading questions that some of us complexity theorists kind of go into.

This is where we're actually gonna get to some definite ideas.

So this is where everything will come to be

with what we've been doing over the entire weekend.

We're asking that everybody, asking strongly, not requiring, but asking strongly that everybody answers these questions for the end of the day.

So let's put this into two sections.

This is the research and development focus.

This is serving to get your work on track.

So the first one to answer is, what is your question, problem, or exploration?

What are you actually trying to do?

Answer this in a couple of short sentences.

Describe your approach, be it modeling, data analysis, a meta study, or anything else you can think of, an editorial, something to that effect.

Getting even more disciplined, describe your plan to workflow for your team.

What are your key deliverables?

What do you actually want to accomplish by the end of it?

Do you require assistance?

What kind of assistance do you require?

What kind of trouble do you think you'll encounter?

We've met together for all in all, less than 72 hours.

So what additional things going forward do you require?

And lastly, what's the point?

What is your impact?

What is your target audience?

What do you want to do?

So at the end of the day, let's answer all five of these questions for the research and development side.

And then we also have something going forward for the team logistics side.

So this is for you all.

This is the inception of all of our ideas.

And we really want you to go out over the next month to years

to actually really work on your project.

So also give us these.

Who are the members of your team?

Just use names as well as any relevant real-world contact you wish to share with each other.

Break it down into what are the component contributions of your team members?

Who is splitting the workload?

What are

What are people expected to do?

What are people good at?

And what do people want to do on your teams?

This is another key thing to formalize.

What is your plan for team check-ins?

Do you want to schedule a weekly or biweekly call?

Do you want to have your checkpoints?

And then do you want to have a crunch time for actually wrapping everything up?

And the last point is related to number three.

Set an end date for reporting out to the rest of the community, checking back in with us.

I don't have this as a question mark because I really want people, or we really want people rather, to set just a date where you're finished and you can report back to us on how things are, what you've accomplished.

So set yourself an end date, set yourself a goal, and then structure your team check-ins from there.

Um, I'll tell you how our team works.

Um, on the Lexie weekend side, we have a weekly, a weekly phone call or weekly, um, online session with each other and we decide what to do from there and we keep it, keep it going.

Um, and then we have our, uh, goal target date is this weekend.

So, um, this structure is really important.

So fill out and formalize both of these, give yourselves, um,

Give yourself space and we will share these out at the end of the day.

All right.

So to this effect, we have a couple of checkpoints for you.

What we'd like to do is have a team cross-pollination.

We'll be forming Jitsi rooms and we'll be asking teams to mix, introduce each other, talk about what the teams are doing, talk about what everybody on the team is doing.

And you can check back here on the live stream at 1030 and we will give you these rooms for you guys to actually see each other start cross pollinating start talking about things and See how that forms out for you Next one is next checkpoint.

Is it 1 o'clock to 1 15 here in the live stream?

We'll have some logistics questions to go over and

And really get into the weeds.

This is where you should have finished your presentation questions, research development, team logistics.

So by 1 o'clock, 1.15, really have everything for your team done.

And we'll come back and we'll share it all out.

So good luck and have fun.

And here we go on the racing forward part of Complexity Weekend.

So anyway.


SPEAKER_28:
Thank you, JP, indeed.

Hear, hear.

So at this point, we're going to keep the live stream going just so that people who are watching later can get caught up.

But if you're ready to jump in with your team and just start working, this is absolutely the time to do that.

And I think it would really be helpful for maybe those last slides to come up again, JP, just so we could talk through the details as a reference point as to why some of these specific questions are being asked.

And then also address some of these longstanding questions.

You said don't over intellectualize it.

But at the same time, I have this reflex.

But if we don't come to a holistic understanding of the problem, then we're just going to be making these solutions.

We're going to be trying to brute force with a hammer.

And it's going to be a problem that requires a different kind of tool.

So those are the kinds of things I want to address in this next section of the conversation, which, again, is totally optional.

So if you're looking to join a team and you're live right now, post in I need a team.

If you're asynchronous and you need a team, also go to I Need a Team.

If you're on a team and you just want a place to relax and listen to a little bit instead of contributing, we're going to stay live here.

So let's just keep talking about these really important topics.

And then also, again, everyone always knows that they can reach out to the facilitators who are there to help them.

So, JP, go ahead.


SPEAKER_21:
Let's see where it was.


SPEAKER_19:
There's always this push-pull when you're getting to heavy research, right?

So what we wanted to do is really ground this.

Sean is a fan.

Maybe Sean can tip in as well.

Sean is a fan of actually asking

questions and having problems that we can solve instead of kind of your typical complexity-based approaches, which I like to say are more exploratory.

So, Sean, what's your take on how to ground a project?


SPEAKER_18:
How to ground a project?

Is that what you asked?

Yeah.

I think the easiest way to do it right now... What are good methods?

Now go ahead, ask again.


SPEAKER_19:
What are kind of good metrics to know you're on the right track versus things are not exactly going right?


SPEAKER_18:
It's a little hard to hear your question, JP, but I'm going to take it as how do you make sure you're actually having a practical impact with your work versus

maybe writing that excellent paper that people will read in a year or two that will expand the knowledge sphere some.

And I think really, yeah, that stakeholder side you're on is perfect because it really comes down to the stakeholders, right?

And what problems are really being experienced right now physically in reality?

Are people...

you know, is there a limiting amount of ventilators right now?

Are ventilators, you know, actually helping the medical case or not?

You know, how many people are on ventilators right now and their condition is maybe worsening because we are assuming the ventilator is helping or something?

Like, I don't know.

You know, there is the reality of the situation.

And then there is like our model, right?

Everyone thinks in models.

We all have our own model of the world.

There are some models are popular and spread like a virus itself amongst people.

And some are just your own personal experiences.

But your brain is a model creator.

And so there's all these models and some of them do not fit the objective reality around us.

So the only way to cut through that barrier is to the empathy that comes with talking and interfacing with somebody having lived experience.

So if you're wanting to talk about ventilators, which I know very little about, everything I said earlier, I had no idea about, but I would learn a lot more if I sat and I talked to a nurse and I just hopped on a call for 30 minutes

And I got the download of the lived experience.

And that would totally change my conception and my model of the way ventilators fit into this whole crisis.

Is it even something that we should be focusing on?

What I thought was interesting, we asked a lot of registered participant registrations what problems they were interested on.

And that's a limited list because there's lots of things they could be focusing on.

But ventilators actually were near the bottom of the list.

And that was curious for me because they have been talked about a lot as the shortage of them.

But I'm curious, does that mean in reality people don't think ventilators are the best leverage point to really create the most positive change right now?

I don't know, but I would learn a lot more if I actually download the lived experience.

That's, I guess, my main point.


SPEAKER_28:
Thanks, Sean.

Why don't you post these slides with these guiding questions in general while we continue speaking to these topics.

So the question about grounding a research project, I think the first step is just to recognize the magnitude of the problem.

because it's really good to get criticized from both angles.

Oh, it's too big, it's too lofty, it will never work.

And oh, it's too detailed, it's too narrow.

That might be a good indicator that you're somewhere in the middle, which could be achievable, but also impactful.

And staying grounded, to me, means always coming back to the reality of the situation.

It means always coming back.

Whether the discussion is going down a rabbit hole about some mathematical technique or about some philosopher from the past or about someone's personal testimony even, you can always come back to square one, which is, is this addressing

And if it's a mission creep, when the sort of, when the mission or the question starts to drift and expand, it can be helpful and playful.

And it's where a lot of the innovation and complexity arises from is when people are actually reorienting the question and the discussion on the fly to accommodate new things that are being brought up.

And then just gently, it helps either internally or in a conversation to

to return the focus of the group or yourself back to the reality of the situation and just ask is this really the single most important thing that i need to be doing right now to serve in light of the questions that we're asking and the way we're asking them i mean

Go ahead, Dan.

I was just going to ask how we aim for immediate impact with things that are long term, intergenerational or just very long term.


SPEAKER_19:
We aim for how we aim for I mean, this is one of those things that's that's a.

kind of a fun space to think about by way of we're having a discussion today with RJ about vibrational frequencies.

Oh no, I was arguing about vibrational frequencies.

You have your short-term stuff, your medium-term stuff, and your long-term stuff.

And it kind of breaks it down into components, I think.

So maybe the paper is the loft goal, and maybe just

Honestly, getting the team off the ground is your immediate short-term goal.

I think the specter of a global pandemic is kind of interesting because there's something out there for... This is relevant for everybody.

This is relevant for everybody around the world.

Whether code is hit, whether it's passed, whether this first round is passed, whether people are waiting to see what happens in their communities, either by way of immediate effects or long-term effects.

That's what really strikes me about exactly what we're going through right now, is that this is one of those events that happens on many scales, many vibrational frequencies.

Not many, if not all.

So I think this is, even now as I'm talking about it, this is sobering and grounding to me.

As for exact methodologies and tool sets for that, I'll defer to the experts in the room.


SPEAKER_28:
One thought on the balance between immediate impact and long-term outcomes is just thinking about the definition of chaos, which means sensitivity to initial conditions or sensitivity to small changes.

And so the kind of vision there is when you have a stream that's just flowing in a straight line, if you put a little piece of wood in here or just an inch over to the side, they're going to end up an inch apart a mile down the river because the stream is going in a straight line.

But when you have a turbulent or a chaotic system,

two pieces of wood or two particles of dust in the air that start off really close can rapidly diverge.

And so that's summarized mathematically by a lot of work in complexity science, but also qualitative work on historicity and on the importance of time dependence for complex systems.

All these threads come together.

So what we can do right now in this weekend is we can make the small changes

that prepare us to end up in a really different place.

So for example, if you make the small change, you decide with just a few button clicks that you're going to say hello to one of our other participants, you're going to start a new collaboration.

The small change that you're making today, the immediate impact is you're reaching out, you're saying, hey, thanks so much for sharing what you shared in general or in explore bias or in explore cognition.

I really hadn't heard it that way.

It's really powerful what you said.

That's a small change.

It's just something you type into a box.

But it can be that little difference that puts you onto a different track where the long-term consequences can be just a world apart from where you would have been if you didn't make that slight change.

So I think we don't need to think, okay, we have 100 feet to go, so we need 30 feet this weekend.

Otherwise, we're not going to get to 100.

It's more like you're starting with the small changes now that are going to really prepare you and your team for the long road ahead.

And the long road ahead is really divergent depending on what you do right now.


SPEAKER_19:
I absolutely read what you were saying.

And I think one of the more important things to keep in mind during the day is actually our mixer here.

This is where maybe if you talk to somebody or talk to somebody you wouldn't talk to otherwise, don't be afraid to speak up at this point.

This is where some of that chaotic mixing happens.

And I think it's really important

you know, from a, from a complexity standpoint, organizational standpoint, right.

We, we try to apply our principles, complex mistakes in what we're doing.

So, um, everybody out there, this is our project as, as complexity.

Uh, this is what we do for, for, um, yeah, in the space.

So this is one of those months where maybe somebody.

takes the risk or takes the chance and speaks up.

Or maybe somebody, you know, an online town walks up to somebody and actually cross-pollinates.

This is where some of that magic happens, I think.

So really take advantage of these times while we are all together, you know, for the last time in a while, first and last time, and then first time again.

Take advantage of these times to really mix and really cross-mingle.

And the pollination is where the magic happens, in my opinion.


SPEAKER_27:
I agree.

Go ahead, Sean.


SPEAKER_18:
I just want to bring up attack the model at this moment.

So when we are in this mixing between the teams, it's really a great opportunity to try.

Sorry if I get it right.

We say pitching, but this isn't such a business-oriented

you know context but you you know what is your pitch like like what tell them the problem you think you're solving what you think you're doing the way you're approaching it what your modeling approach is and if the other person i know it's kind of like it feels like it might be rude or something but it's really helpful get into this attack the model mindset which is like really get in and dig in some key questions that are going to make them question their approach because that feedback is so essential and the earlier you get it right you're talking about little initial condition changes

that little nudge there will like so quickly and dramatically change the outcome and the value and it feels uncomfortable doing it attack the model feels like like i'm being very rude or i'm like i'm like you know break bursting their bubble um but really you're doing them like a huge favor and if you can anyone who's watching right now if you can be brave enough to have that mentality maybe going into this mixer and just saying i don't know if what you're assuming is is true

You know, that is going to go a long way to helping them find the right path.


SPEAKER_28:
And it kind of goes back, JP, it goes back to the computer science example you brought up where the computer scientist had rediscovered some basics of some other field.

And I'm sure this happens so often.

We can prevent 30 years of wasted work.

We get everybody getting aligned on a project that just simply cannot succeed because it's not intercultural or it doesn't account for nonlinear consequences or it doesn't have a total perspective on the system.

We can preempt that.

And so those are really where complexity science perspectives from everyone come into play.

Because if you're in this cross-pollination period and the team is talking about supply chains and you just bring up something that you're curious about, maybe to you, it's just a small question.

It's like, but did you think about refrigerated food versus non-perishable food?

And it's like, whoa, that's a dimension we can now consider.

And so then they'll take it and run.

But it's the question and it's the insight there that really are going to provide value and prevent this wasted energy and effort that's just from non-total thinking.

JP?


SPEAKER_19:
Yeah, at this point, we don't intend on, I don't think this should be intended on just team as entity, meeting a team as entity, talking about the ideas at this level.

Talk about what your teammates are doing as well.

So add cross-pollination there.

Maybe somebody is doing some data research and somebody else is doing data research.

Talk about what the commonalities are.

Talk about what the organizational structure is.

Talk about, you know, are...

your development focus, as well as the logistics questions that we've now posted in the general.

Talk about these things in your mixing, what you're going to do as well.

So these are all relevant and important questions, as well as relevant and important topics and objectives for each individual within the teams.


SPEAKER_18:
Dan, can I bring up some questions that Depi Center, right on KeyBase, everyone on KeyBase right now at Depi Center, CW and ProBall are two facilitators from India who are awesome.

They had some great questions that I want to work into the maybe the questions we're going to have people address in their presentations.

I want to just bring some of them up.

you know they're really good at they have a lot of experience with just hackathons across the board and how to how to actually avoid this innovation theater where you're kind of showing oh look i'm innovating whatever but nothing really happens they're good at cutting out through that and some of the questions that they wanted to uh our teams to reflect on and ask themselves

where not only the five W's and how the specifics get specific, that's a good one, but also what is the guiding question around which your team is aligned?

For them, they were saying, what is the central inquiry?

If it is difficult to frame it, the central inquiry can be

can be formed by interconnecting many inquiries.

So what is really the thing aligning your whole team together and keeping you connected and passionate and working?

Because teams aren't always easy to be on.

The work isn't always easy.

And if you have some principle that's keeping you aligned, you will make it through those rough patches.

So that's a great question.

And then another one they brought up was,

Let's see, the appropriate level of an, sorry, what was that, Dan?


SPEAKER_28:
Let's do the first question.

First question was about framing the scale or the scope of the problem and balancing sort of the vastness and the interconnectedness of the world with the specifics.

and so they really showed us the high and the low end so to speak of that they talked about using simple organizational tools and clarifying questions like the five w's and the h which are who what why where when for the five w's and then the h is the how and uh that's sort of a way that you

With two letters, I mean, you use one of those five times, but there's only two letters.

With just those two letters, you can always refocus back to the fundamentals.

So that's at the very practical level.

Just before you even move forward as a team, you really want to make sure that people are talking about the same who, what, why, where, when.

They can have a slightly different perspective if the who is medical professionals.

And so for someone that means in their country, their experience is a certain level or a certain type of medical professional.

But if everyone's aligned on medical professionals, you've already gained a lot of information.

You've zoned in a lot.

And then they also a lot about making larger or smaller context as needed.

And that's really where the facilitators, as well as the natural and emergent leadership styles of these groups comes into play.

Because if we think about framing quite literally and reframing, as Monica discussed, framing like a piece of art, it's like, well, you could always make a differently shaped frame on a smaller subsection.

You could crop the art piece and make a small frame.

Or you could have a bigger frame that includes the original frame.

And so part of the fun in complexity is we're always putting frames around our frames and keep on building out, building out, breaking out of the box, asking, what is the implicit frame that actually all these questions are in?

We haven't exhaustively searched the space because there's also a framing for the way that we're searching right now.

So that means you can always build a layer of frame out, but that tends towards abstraction and towards intellectualization.

And then you can also always make the frames...

You can say, you know, let's really go into this paper.

Let's really go into the original data set.

We'll do some statistical model to really, really, really dig down.

And that may come in handy, too.

But what complexity means in the facilitation and in the team context is everyone is there with the end in mind and with the community guidance.

guidelines and they're ready to scale out and scale in.

And so if your group is feeling like they're lost somewhere on that continuum or even one member of your group thinks that you're shooting a little too high, a little too abstract, or it's getting a little too detailed with the methods before people are aligned on the what or the who is being impacted or the why we're even doing this.

It's all good.

As RJ called it, the alarm pheromone, no alarm pheromone shaming, just bring it up with your group or bring in a facilitator, get us on board, get the epicenter or any of these other facilitators into the conversation and just say, okay,

We're all on board that we could frame it in a bigger picture or we could crop down.

So the framing space is infinite and the approach space is infinite.

How do we navigate through that so that we're doing something that's realistic and implementable and impactful?


SPEAKER_18:
JP, I'd love to hear your thoughts on that, and then I have another question I'd like to bring up after from Depi Center.


SPEAKER_19:
I mean, thoughts on its... My general thoughts are, they're going to the place of what I had mentioned, I have some common things I always revert to, is iteration, right?

And I'm a big fan of the percolation model of

team activity or team uh team genesis right so we're going along monica really enjoyed this she called it a pivot yesterday right you're going along and you're exploring your dude um and suddenly you encounter some resistance and um i like i like things working out or maybe teams have to divide

or maybe things have to change, or maybe teams themselves are a dynamic process.

So it's not just about committing to the beginning and committing to the end and then keeping everything together.

Allow things to evolve, allow things to adapt, not just on the team level, but on the individual level.

I mean, I'm very much a fan of bottom-up organization.

I'm very much a fan of

what I call emergent leadership.

Leadership is an intrinsic property of groups.

So, which is why I like relatively flat hierarchies without titles.

And it's always the balance between, always the balance between structure and

you know, impose structure or roles and kind of can do attitude towards things.

So if somebody, you know, if somebody is having problems or somebody is encountering difficulty on, you know, just at any level, be it the team, be it the individual,

um, you know, don't be afraid to ask for help.

Don't be afraid to modify roles.

Don't be afraid to splinter and find out what is, um, a realistic goal for a subgroup.

If, if that's where things have to go, um, be lofty or if, uh, you know, during cross pollination, things seem to be really, really working out, um, expand as needed.

So, I mean, it's, it is this, um,

You know, we are adaptable entities, and that's kind of one of the cornerstones that we're working with here.


SPEAKER_18:
Did that answer your question?

Do you have any?

Oh wait, no, actually we also provide was a great segue actually to the next question, which is, I want to talk about roles, you know, like, like, uh, Devin center brought up a great point, which was basically like you're saying, you know, a team is, is composed of individuals.

It is itself a complex adaptive system.

And like these individuals have properties that can, uh, through interactions, you know, help with this emergent leadership, uh, emergent purpose, like all these other macroscopic properties that, that can kind of emerge.

And, um,

Basically, they were asking, is the team balanced in terms of the roles present?

And then whether another property of the individuals is the bandwidth they have to work.

Obviously, that's an important one.

And then, but going back, and their skill sets and their experiences, but going back to role, does anyone out there play role-playing games, right?

Like Dungeons and Dragons, something like that, right?

It's great just to sit with your team, think of them like a D&D party.

You're like, okay, who's our like berserking barbarian?

Who's our, you know, healing?

Okay, definitely, Dan, you gotta pick that up.


SPEAKER_28:
You know, it's a funny point.

And RJ and I have talked and joked a lot about where does complexity and role playing games and gamification come together.

And we talked a lot about gamification in the educational sections of games.

the proceedings, so Rose's talk, as well as just a lot of the discussion around education, remote education.

So gamification can have a double edge, absolutely, because the sort of grind it out mentality, like you're a level 79 paladin and what's next?

You become a level 80 paladin.

Complexity really isn't like that.

The skills and the approaches that we take

They're not just drilling down and gearing up and empowering yourself as an individual by an amulet here and a cloak here.

All these things are not only within an individualist mindset, they're within a linear and accumulation mindset.

based mindset, whether you're accumulating experience points or skills or objects, it really is a gamification and a little bit of a lightly encoded critique of our society in many ways.

And so we've thought about what is the role playing game of complexity?

What is complexity RPG?

And it has a lot to do more with people's flexibility

and their ability to be a part of teams that are highly functional.

And so we see some of those things coming back together in the high level role playing game communities.

So in World of Warcraft or in Dungeons and Dragons, where you have people who are really good at one task and then they can come together.

And so that can make a team where the team function is certainly larger than the sum of the parts.

But the way they got there was through extreme division of labor, extreme specialization, and often the roles are very fragile.

So, okay, the team's functioning really well when the wizard is here who's really good, but then once the one wizard drops out, it's like the linchpin gets pulled and the team can't function.

And so complexity teams, we aim to have that high level of function, but at the same time, not make it conditional upon individual excellence alone or objects in accumulation of wealth alone.

But what is it that makes teams functional that isn't about hyper-specialization and rather thinking about getting to that performance level, but through what kind of approach?

Well, kind of what we're thinking about and talking about here.

JP or Sean?


SPEAKER_18:
I just got a quick thing and then I'll pass it to JP.

You were talking about when the wizard is there, things go well and then they leave.

One thing we talk about is redundancy of roles in teams or multi-classing.

Make sure all of your party members have a couple of levels in some other classes there so there's redundancy in case the wizard has to step out.


SPEAKER_28:
And also, Zargum just posted in our chat, raidguild.org.

He said, I know some people who have adopted the RPG narrative for real-world collaborative projects.

And yes, it's something to unpack and explore.

We don't know about this platform.

It's just kind of a project within the space of thinking about

How could we move role-playing games first into the realm of individual improvement?

There's probably a lot of habit tracking and fitness applications that gamify the process.

You're leveling up in push-ups.

It sounds better to say that you're leveling up in push-ups rather than you're trying to increase your one set max performance.

And so it brings that sort of dopamine-related goal accumulation in a way that's transferable because these games are transferable.

Winning a game is kind of winning a game across games.

And then it's the game of life.

And the game of life has a lot to do more with complexity and making it work with teams than it has to do with, again, finding the right weapon that's going to make you more charismatic or something like that.


SPEAKER_19:
Yeah, so as, you know, I think we're all closet geeks here, but I mean, the other thing that I'm thinking of as we're discussing on this thread, if you will, I'm a fan of, I'm actually a fan of rules, and I'm a fan of constraints, and I'm a fan of your substrate, and I'm a fan of what kind of bones you impose.

or bones you sink down so that things can develop on that.

So that's why I really wanted to push that last point on, I'll share my screen again.

Oh, it's gone.

Anyway, the last point about, you know, give yourselves an end date.

Give yourselves a goal where you can definitively say, you know, in four months we'll have this done.

In six months we'll have this done.

In two weeks we'll have this done.

Give yourselves just a realistic expectation of when things are finished because that will kind of orient all of your structure around that date.

At least for something as relevant as, you know,

and apply, if you will, as working on these COVID-19 projects or problems or questions or things like that.

I think that's, for me, complexity is fundamentally about structure formation.

I'm leery of giving any solid definitions, but if I were to boil it down to one thing, it's why do we see structure?

And you know, how do those structures evolve over time or something like that?

And one of the reasons we see structures because things build on existing things or things build on, you know, of course things build on each other, but one of the things that is immutable are kind of the boundary conditions and the rules that things are set by.

So if you have just your end goal, okay, by this time we'll have something and you know,

Strike some bones to that.

This person is doing this, and this person is doing this.

And this is what our couple of checkpoints look like.

Something as simple as that can act as the skeleton for your team.

And then just kind of add things to that.

And it grows and it grows as time goes on.

So yeah, in gamification, the rules you play are the important things to go by.

Despite myself, this is my type A, type B personality kind of in conflict constantly.

But rules are not bad.

Constraints are not bad.

They actually generate, not impose, but they generate a lot of motivation, a lot of structure, a lot of orientation, also a lot of identity.

If you have a check-in once a week, meet the same people.

Maybe we meet for coffee on Sunday mornings or something like that.

Daniel and I have a little conversation group that does that.

And it's a great thing to look forward to.

So take this time as beneficial to all of us.


SPEAKER_28:
Yeah, I'd like to just pick up on that point about roles and then provide another quote from the Epicenter and go from this role-playing game discussion back to complexity.

So what they wrote was, after you've set the context and the frame, so that's related to our earlier discussion about always being able to frame bigger, always being able to frame smaller.

So after you've gotten the framing, so you've gotten some specification about what the group is going to set out to do,

And then they wrote, people can try to see if the team is balanced as to how differently the team members are able to think and work and whether they have the required bandwidth to work on it or do they have people with very similar kinds of skill sets and experiences.

And so there's an assessment phase where you ask, okay, whose bandwidth or time commitment is such and such?

What kind of skills, what kind of perspectives do we have on the team?

And what's interesting about complexity is we're not looking for maximum overlap.

We're not looking for minimum overlap.

Both of those are kind of the ends of a continuum.

And as JP always draws, complexity is in the middle.

It's between those two points on the number line.

We know that we're not looking for simply maximum overlap to make like a megatron that's just data science or a megatron of just philosophy.

We're not looking for minimum overlap for people who aren't even communicating that well.

We're looking for people who can bridge, for people who can help bring a collective understanding to the group.

And so somewhere in the middle between no overlap and total overlap, you're going to find group complexity.

And then the epicenter continued and they wrote once the team forms the question, which is very pertinent, should be asked, how are we using aspects of complexity in our approach?

This is not to say that the team has to take all the theories that they come across in an academic paper.

And so, Sean, I'll go right to you after this.

But it just shows complexity science isn't the list of topics addressed in a paper.

It's something else.

So do you want to speak to that, Sean, or you can take it wherever you'd like?


SPEAKER_18:
Yeah, I think the way that maybe incorporate complexity is the way we've been trying to do it all weekend, which is to think of your team as a complex system.

So you can apply as much theory as you've read or someone on your team has read or source to that lens to your team to optimize the way you're working together or to find the theories that apply to the particular problem you're trying to solve.

And either is fine.

If you don't see it, that's fine too.

Sometimes being blind or biased is helpful.

But I do want to, before we go into this mixer at 1030, I want to open that team spreadsheet.

Do you think that's something?

Well, I guess it's a public live stream, so maybe we shouldn't.

But I just wanted to give some sort of macro lens of which teams are out there before we start pairing them up.

Do you want to do that?

What do you think?


SPEAKER_28:
Yeah, I think that we'll be working on the team mixing structure with Monica.

You can just message her and be checking on that thread.

And it's almost like there's these two intersecting ways of coming at complexity.

There's the

person-independent topics.

So saying, well, fractals, chaos, phase transitions, that's complexity.

That's the word map.

Those are the concepts that one learns or those are the concepts that get brought up, but it's totally lifted from the people.

And that's actually the part of complexity that reminds me the most of science.

Because people would always say, well, science is about the claim made.

It doesn't matter who's making them.

It doesn't matter if it's the tenured professor or if it's a student who's not in academia.

The claim is the claim.

And the claim always stands by the evidence, not by appeal to authority

or by being taken by an ad hominem attack.

So that's the part of complexity that reminds me the most of, I guess, classical science.

And then there's this other element that's absolutely the complement, like the yin and the yang, where it's like, you know, if we have people from all over the world with all different perspectives and they're coming together and they're talking about cricket,

or anything, that's complexity in action.

Even if the topic is something that's not considered traditionally intellectual or not considered traditionally within the realm of entrepreneurship or in service and volunteering, there's the personnel aspect and the personal aspect.

And that is so independent of the topics.

And so it's like we have these two parts that are semi-modular in a sense because the topics are free-flowing and the people are always connecting.

JP?


SPEAKER_19:
I've got a friend in the complexity space who's a big fan of competing fields.

And one of his theories is most, you know, most of the interesting behavior that is generated out there is because of competing fields.

So, you know, lightning strikes or ant colonies, you know, food versus what's the other one?

food versus nest pheromones or something like that.

So you always have this like tensions between all of this.

And I think in the complexity space, that's, uh, that's quite relevant as well.

Um, you know, I'm really resonating with what you're saying in that, in that, in that, in that respect.

I mean, are we a discipline based, um, discipline or concepts based, um, group of people where we all come together because of our shared interests in, you know,

chaos theory.

When I first learned about a strange attractor, I just imagined a strange attractor going across the sky.

And that's why you see the clouds bubbling.

There's a cloud edge that you can't really predict, but the cloud is still there.

So that's the stuff that really resonates with me.

And then as I continued my journey along into this,

into the complexity phase.

It's also about the thinkers and the people.

I'm a generalist across the board.

I'm not really an expert in any one field.

I have my things I'm better at than others.

But compared to somebody who specializes in those things, my skills are limited, of course.

But I'm still welcome in the community.

And the same goes for those people who are real, true, disciplined experts.

They are necessary as well.

So I thank everyone for listening to me as I kind of like take a state space search to get to what I'm finally actually talking about, right?

I think as long as we all approach things with a kind of a magnanimous umbrella that we're all under the umbrella of complexity, no matter if we accomplish it via our disciplines and our own desire to improve our research or whether we just like the community, you know,

generally because it's an exciting, vibrant place to be, those two things are relevant, and those two things are important, and those two things are what gives crackle and spark to what we do as complexity scientists.


SPEAKER_28:
Yeah, and just to give one more thought on that, it's not just like it's the science and then the people and they're two independent streams or light and shadow or something like that.

It's like if the people aren't always this exciting and vibrant mixture, then the ideas become stale and fragile.

And the ideas aren't just out there in a field waiting to be caught with a net.

They come from the people.

And so there's this feedback.

And especially where it becomes magical, I think, with complexity is we're a community that's talking about these things like collective cognition and feedback and awareness of bias.

These are things that we can actually implement.

And so we have this really, really tight feedback loop between the topics that we're talking about and then the people.

So instead of just the topic is unchanging and then you're either coming into this simple attractor or you're not like if you're not on the main path of this academic discipline, you're just off the beaten path.

You're not going to be on the career path.

You're not on the knowledge path out of the social network.

You're just not playing the game.

But with complexity, where the phase space approach that JP alluded to, the phase space is everyone and everything.

We don't put an outer bound on what it means to have complexity or to do complexity thinking, because if there were something that were outside of it, we can just say, wow, now there's a frame of complexity that includes this thing I didn't really expect to be in it.

And so for some people who come from a qualitative background, it means incorporating data.

But for some people who have been trained very deeply in the quantitative areas, it means taking a serious look at how art or about how all these other areas come into play.

Sean and then JP.


SPEAKER_18:
Can we talk about the environment and the system and the boundaries in the system, the environment and

Just in general, like, how do you think of the complexity of the environment?

You know, how that interacts with your system?

It just, that all rung a bell in my head.

Can we just talk about that?


SPEAKER_19:
Well, one thing to finish talking about the individuals first before we actually get to talk about the environment.

I like to think of, I like to think of, I'm all about dualisms, right?

I like to think about, are you a connecting node or are you a processing node?

And in the complexity space, that's what makes for fun research for me is you can have your team and makes for fun research as well as makes for fun and interesting individual work as well as teamwork.

You can have your own specialized discipline.

You can be very productive in that and then make some tenant connections.

And other people might be specialists and generalists and have far and wide reading connections and are able to take your work to other places.

And I think that's what we're talking about with as Complexity Weekend grows as an entity, it connects both people who are processing nodes, people who are connecting nodes.

So that's a really powerful place to be.

Sean.

Environment and substrate, what's your, I mean, that's the other thing that's, you know, the other thing that I think is, you know, essential to complexity.

It's not just the things that are there, but it's where the thing is, right?


SPEAKER_18:
How important is it for it to be in your model?

Do you have to model the environment?


SPEAKER_28:
Does one have to model the environment in order to consider a complex system?

Is that the question?


SPEAKER_18:
Yeah, more or less.


SPEAKER_28:
I think that just with so many other questions, the answer is in the question or it's in the phrasing.

If the complex system is the cloud, then you've already given the ground, which is the sky.

And so when you're thinking about a complex system and you say, here's the boundaries of the system, it's kind of like, you know, is the lock on the door to keep them out or to keep us in?

when you define the system, you've also defined the context of the system.

And then when there's blurriness, for example, there's four people in a room.

And so from a spatial perspective, that's the system, but they're each informationally linking out.

So what is the complex system?

Is it based upon physical edges or is it based around informational edges?

What happens when one system is intersecting with another one or when it's embedded entirely or partially with another one?

uh there's so many ways that systems can interact which is why especially when we look at that map of the complexity sciences which we can have up on screen in a little bit there was almost a quantitative branch with thermodynamics and computer science and then there was actually a very qualitative systems branch

people who were really making clear that there were systems level properties that simply couldn't be addressed through reductionist analysis, whether molecular reductionist analysis or analytical techniques.

And then what we're seeing now and hopefully with the blossoming of complexity science with applied complexity is where the branches are coming together.

And that represents

people recognizing that we're going to need the systems modeling approaches like Zargum's CAD-CAD, these dynamical and generalizable system modeling tools.

And we're going to always need to be within a qualitative frame for this iterative modeling and making sure that we're correctly accounting for the way that the environment of the system is its own system.


SPEAKER_19:
I mean, I almost took the... I'm very glad Daniel answered that one to begin with, because I was about to say, you know, it depends.

I think, you know, some of the more interesting, you know, certainly canonical age-based models don't include environmental considerations.

You know, it's... Only if you want to talk about...

This gets me into my agent-based modeling background.

If you're talking about Boids, for instance, you don't really need to model the environment.

You do need a container to put them in so they can bounce off the edge or something like that.

Or if you're modeling wave propagation, which is arguably a simple system, you do need an edge condition.

But if you're Game of Life, these things can just go off forever and fall off the edge and da-da-da-da-da.

So you do need an environment for the most part.

I don't know if you need to necessarily model the environment, but again, it depends, so.


SPEAKER_18:
I want to go concrete.

So let's say we're managing a Starbucks, right?

We need to understand how many people are going to come into the Starbucks at a certain rate per week so we can have the right products in place and whatnot.

We have the door that we can define as our analytical boundary of people entering into Starbucks, assuming we can all go to Starbucks at some point.

How important is it to understand the event calendar for the park next to the Starbucks so that you can understand, oh, there's soccer practice that occurs every Tuesday and Thursday.

That might lead a grouped network of people coming in at certain times.

you know, do you have to have a conception or understanding of the local environment or different shells or onion shells of the environment?

Does that, by having more of those shells, does that improve your ability to make predictions?


SPEAKER_19:
That's kind of general thought.

This is where...

you know, this is where the seniors who are, you know, the veterans or the people who've actually been working out there who are listening, this is where they kind of tune out to me.

And this is where the people who are just beginning their complex, their operation might want, might want to hear until it becomes relevant.

I'm a fan of the complexity modeling approach as you add pieces until you get interesting behavior.

And then that's where you go.

The other one is to start from like, you're like the best model of the world is the world.

And that's why you have these data-driven approaches and you have these other things where you just have your sampling way and then you can infer stuff from there.

But for real modeling,

it's yes, it's important to understand where people are moving and it's important to understand when they are coming in.

Um, but at what scale are you addressing that?

I mean, are you actually modeling like how to evacuate the Starbucks or how to make people go through the line fastest?

Or are you looking at for your general like business plan model?

Like let's open those days.

Let's, and then we might as well just have a pop-up Starbucks stand, you know?

So, um,

I almost don't want to say it depends, but it's important to, and we see this all the time with kids when they're building models, for instance, like a NetLogo.

They'll just want to throw everything in, and then you have a model you don't understand, and it just all goes to the mess.

So I say from simplicity arrives complexity.

And that's my bias, but there are many people out there, and it's fun to work with people who take the opposite approach.


SPEAKER_28:
Thank you, JP.

Zargum, welcome to the live stream.

Please take it away, whatever you'd like to.


SPEAKER_13:
So I have so many opinions on this, but I think I'm going to try to constrain them to reminding us of a couple like key complex systems concepts.

One is that when we start with the all models are wrong, but some are useful.

Remember that useful is to some end in some context.

So this other concept that's really important is sort of separation of scale, both in space and in time.

So when you're trying to actually build a model, you have to figure out which time scales and which spatial scales you care about and the questions you're trying to ask and answer.

And I think with the Starbucks example, this means like, am I planning the staffing schedules?

If I am planning the staffing schedules, I probably care about the sort of local demand profiles and my model needs to include some demand profiles because that's how I'm gonna plan the staffing schedules.

If I'm modeling whether or not to open a Starbucks here at all, maybe that's a little less of a thing and we need to look at the population and their sort of level of demand for coffee and is there a Pete's nearby, et cetera.

And again, we might have a demand model

but it might look very different because of the sort of temporal scale.

And I think in general, when it comes to modeling the environment, what it's really about saying is what concepts are actually going to make my model useful to the ends I'm creating it for,

And I think that's often what gets missed is that there isn't actually an objective right answer.

Everything is sort of connected upon connected upon connected.

If you keep saying, well, what does this affect?

Oh, what does that affect?

And it's easy for things to kind of have these kiddie models where you're just like, oh, I have a new idea.

Let me plug that in and that in and that in.

And obviously that becomes very difficult to understand and use.

And it's not useful to any particular end besides maybe the exercise of thinking about how interconnected things are, which is actually useful in its own right, but not so much for making a concrete like operational decision.

I don't know if that helps, but like the decision you're trying to make matters a lot or what science or what you're trying to research.


SPEAKER_28:
Yeah, just one about what you said about all models are wrong, but some are useful.

Everyone brings it up in the talk.

And then you say, well, some models might be useful to disinform somebody, to mislead someone.

So is it really a saving grace of statistics to say that people can use this where it's useful for them?

Is science or is complexity or statistics about what makes right?


SPEAKER_13:
Yeah, so this is actually super important and it's part of the reason why like every talk I give includes components about ethics and about the sort of engineering institution and like I come from systems engineering and like control theory and very like you embed models in systems and because those models are also wrong, you're actually managing the gap between the model and reality.

So there's this sort of concept of sort of

algorithmic realism and the idea that like due to computational irreducibility, even our these models that we build are always approximations.

And ultimately, when you choose an approximation model and you embed it in a system and it becomes performative in the way that system acts, like you've changed the way the world works because you've made this decision, made this model based on and then made this decision based on it.

that you can't actually punt the question of model scoping actually at all, that that's where the challenge runs.

You have to be able to sort of say, this model is useful for this.

And, you know, with this end in mind, and it's useful because...

And in doing that, you own your own assumptions and subjective choices, thus alleviating the problem of, well, I can say anything with data and with a model if I want to, and I could further use that to manipulate perception.

I have to basically step above that and say, yeah, we actually understand that that's possible.

But then on the flip side, good scientific modeling process is about sort of identifying what assumptions you are making.

And even if a friend who likes to say you version control your assumptions, really good computational methods are run with a variety of assumptions and can actually test the sensitivity of the results to modeling assumptions.

which is, I think, a really, really important technique to combat this sort of storytelling aspect where you can effectively pick the assumptions that tell the story that you want, but a really robust model that captures a real phenomena in the world is one where you're actually going to observe a similar phenomena for a wide range of sort of equally feasible assumptions.


SPEAKER_18:
Hey, Pepe, you wanted to speak also?

Let's get him in there.

You had something you wanted to say.


SPEAKER_19:
Well, I'd like to know, so as we're discussing complexity as, well, here's, like, before I add, like, my structure to it, before I add too much of what I'm talking about, like, I'm working with this idea, you know, complexity is this, it's a discipline, but it's also a community, right?

It's the, you know, our concrete things like, you know,

chaos theory, mathematics, you know, mathematics expressed in like a nonlinear dynamics, you know, networks, et cetera, et cetera.

And then it's like this community of practice and, and you know, what we're aiming for is like, there are complexity people.

It's what complexity is what complex people do.

I'm wondering as you're like in a, in a, in a,

professional modeling environment, do you start off with something that's very simple and then kind of incorporate complexity principles or do you start off from principles of complexity like, you know, the world is fuzzy and where do we go from there?

How is actually the, you know, these things we're talking about, how are they applied, if you will?


SPEAKER_13:
Yeah, so actually, there was a really great slide earlier in one of the talks, I think it was, I actually don't remember whose slide it was yesterday, but they mentioned the sort of first set of scoping work, which really sort of focuses on defining what the model attempts to achieve.

And I would say that

Complexity concepts come in very strongly in the scoping part as a sort of deciding, again, the sort of what time scale, like what questions am I asking?

What are my goals?

What does useful mean in this context?

And that means that you're going to start introducing concepts like separation of scales in order to address, do I have a second by second simulation?

Do I have a day by day simulation?

Are there some processes that are already at equilibrium and I can sort of assume away?

Are there some processes that are so slow as to treat them as constant?

And can I assume them away?

Similarly, in the spatial dimension, are there things that sort of, you know, I want to say sort of like fuzz away into stochastic processes or representations of external input signals?

And, you know, maybe we know so little about how they're going to behave.

that we're better off using sort of impulse and step and sort of frequency domain inputs to sort of just say like hey look i'm working on this piece of the system but since i know that i don't know this other stuff i just want to characterize how resilient my my model is to some sort of uncontrolled inputs and although we know that they're being driven by some other process which could also be modeled um it becomes important to sort of solve a kind of min cut problem with the rest of the world

where you're saying, like, here's my network of interactions and dependencies.

Here's the outputs and states and inputs that I'm sort of dealing with here.

And here's some stuff that's sort of ancillary and that I can sort of bound its effect on my conclusions.

And in that scoping exercise, you're prepared to start modeling.

And now there's another element here, though, is that there's a change in the phase of a project where once you've defined the scope and you have a concrete path forward,

to help answer operational questions you have to start actually building mathematical models and i use a lot of dynamical systems work actually i'm working on a sort of graduate seminars type thing for people working in software and economics to to review the way that dynamical systems work in the context especially when a lot of the inputs are out of your control possibly strategically controlled by someone else making them games ultimately though the computational models have to take those

differential equations that represent structure, and then keep that to a minimum.

Ironically, we end up with things that are very much like agent-based models in special physics, because you make a set of physics that defines these sort of low dimensional set of restrictions that encode what it means to do a thing.

So like, there's some natural rules, like I showed up at the Starbucks.

Well,

there's a relationship between person shows up, maybe they spend some amount of money and there's like a process or a journey for that person and it couples with the costs and the profits of the Starbucks.

And so you get a sort of like logical set of relations that you can think of almost more in a system dynamic sense, but you can relax the idea of like these high level differential equations models by introducing the notion of agents

interacting in these sort of you know worlds so you get a kind of sim city feel to it if you're learning to do it for the first time where you're mixing this sort of individual level decision making and individual level models and and to your point about the complexity of the models we tend to add complexity very iteratively so you can start with a small chunk of the model

You can start with something that is a sort of system dynamics or agent-based model and then iteratively mix concepts from other modeling domains.

And I think I kind of close this out that in practice, you never really want to start with your modeling approach because that doesn't allow you to iterate towards something useful.

So I tend to issue tools that are approach specific

like a sort of system dynamics and Stella, which I've used in the past, or like an agent based modeling sort of, you know, bottom up framework that lacks sort of, you know, first order programmability of the rules and the environment in the way that I'm used to.

And I use data science tools.

So my team works in scientific Python.

We've,

We've built some tools to make that a bit easier for us.

But ultimately, we're dealing with networks that provide some structure in some of these rules.

We're dealing with what I would call like differential relations.

It's not like differential equations in their entirety.

It's just that we know something about the way the change of one thing affects the state of another.

And to forego those would lose something important.

And yeah, anyway, so the nuts and bolts of it is that it's lots of effort and scoping up front, then sort of iteratively working on models and choosing what to include or exclude, maybe trying to include something and then choosing to remove it because it's shown to be not particularly sensitive.

And really at the end of the day, you want the model that's as simple as possible, but no simpler.

And that's the really hard part because it means you are constantly kind of,

introducing some complexity and analyzing what you're learning from it and then deciding whether or not that that like stuff that you added is actually improving the usefulness of your model um to the ends that that it exists for right just nice dan do you want to share your screen just because we're getting into the 10 30 thing do you want to um kind of give a macro lens on the team so people can start to


SPEAKER_18:
have an internal model of the other teams.


SPEAKER_28:
So we're enjoying this sort of free flowing conversation while most of the teams are still in their working phase.

It's 10 23 AM PST and at 10 30,

We're going to have Monica rejoin us and she's going to lead a team mixing and cross pollination session.

And so when that comes, I will be sharing and we'll have some information up about the different teams.

And we'll also be there in the general chat channel just to address any text based questions.

As we start to move towards the cross-pollination, Zargum, in this next session, we're going to be having teams that have been a little bit in their own echo chamber.

Not that it's a bad thing, they've been focusing in their crucible, maybe it's a better word, but they've been focused and they've been thinking about it a certain way.

How can teams come together into a meta team or into a networking space where they are actually exchanging value and providing helpful perspectives?

What have you seen work there?


SPEAKER_13:
Yeah, so in my experience, there's two things that you can do with the sort of cross-team interactions.

The first one is sanity check each other's assumptions and scope.

So a lot of times your scope and what you're working on is informed by your own perspectives.

and getting a set of different perspectives is really low-hanging fruit.

Just like, here's what we decided and why.

And again, the scoping.

And like, is there anything we're missing?

What do you think?

Yeah, actually, I'd say that's probably the single biggest thing.

And then after that, the sort of next thing is usually...

It's actually more of the same.

It relates to then pointers to other things to consider based on that.

But there's a sort of two phases of it.

One is scope and the other is the actual work.

But like addressing the scope question first is kind of make sure that you're covering blind spots that you might have had.


SPEAKER_28:
Nice.

And that reminds me of what the epicenter talked about when we quoted them earlier about you can always set a bigger frame.

You can always zoom into a smaller frame.

But when the teams are coming together to help improve each other's ideas, if one team thinks that the other one is solving this problem and really they're solving that problem, then.

The comments are off base.

They're no fault.

They're no maliciousness.

It's just if the scope isn't conveyed accurately at the beginning of the sharing session, then the feedback is off target.

So maybe the group is hitting the target, but you just didn't think they were aiming for it.

Or that's why it's so important to get this type of scope based feedback.

So welcome, Monica, to the chat.

We have just a few minutes while people are going to be rejoining.

And we'll start at 1030 with the group formation activity.

But any preliminary or optional thoughts, Monica, or just thoughts on the weekend right now?


SPEAKER_02:
We made it to day three is what I'm going to say.

It's important to celebrate.

And I know it's been kind of a marathon.

And so kudos for everyone who is saying like we're asleep because you're probably daytime of whatever time zone has flipped over the world.

And I hope you're enjoying the learning process.

I think one of the things that I always enjoy when I'm participating in programs like this is that you just walk away and realize, you know, my goal was to learn one thing.

And then I walk away with like 10 million things.

any of this before but hopefully you know you're at the curve of realizing that uh you know there's so much always to learn but through that there's joy um and so i hope everyone is having a great time and i'm super excited about this next segment that we're going to dive deeper into not only to check in how everyone is doing but also to tie into to make sure we mix people together as i've been tuning in earlier you've been all highlighting the importance of cross collaboration how it's important to not stay in your own domain so that you find

critical problem solving, especially when it's complex like COVID-19 and many other matters.

So that's kind of where I am right now.

So looking forward to catching up with everyone very soon.


SPEAKER_28:
Cool, just one related thought to that.

So celebrating that we made it to the third day is great.

And another time for celebration is whenever a team makes a decision or an outcome or a product that couldn't have been accomplished by individuals alone, it's really important to stop and celebrate the team's formation and function in those moments.

Because a lot of times teams get into a blame assignment mode when things are failing.

And it's a little bit harder to stop and say, you know, this Google doc, none of us could have made it.

So that's success.

That's us as a team working and then not doing a blame assignment when things are failing, but just a appreciation or a highlighting or just a recognition when things are working, even if it's like, right, it's neutral because it's working because we're a team and we're supposed to be working.

Good, but also take the time to slow down and recognize and appreciate that because that's what it feels like to be on a functional team when you're not assigning blame or trying to fix a problem, but rather just celebrating that things are working fine.


SPEAKER_02:
absolutely and to add to that you know this ties perfectly to yesterday's conversation where why we talked about different strength finder even love language just like do you actually know how to be appreciated are you making sure that your team is feeling valued because it might be just that simple notice like guys like look how much we've done in the past whatever amount of hours together we were strangers before we didn't even know each other

that existed in the world.

And that in itself is power.

And so yes, it feels like we're not still solving enough, we're not getting enough, but you know, baby steps out of time.

And if you feel like you need a little pause, tune in, because hopefully this is going to be a little pause where you take a step back as well as getting a chance to build on that.

And after that, if you still need a break, go go ahead and take a little screen break, you know, whether it's five minutes, just like pause, even taking a quick nap hugely helps.

So just want to share that.


SPEAKER_28:
Cool, Monica, what could I have up on my screen to help for the 10.30 session?

Would you like the Jamboard or do you want information on the teams?


SPEAKER_02:
Let's see.

I would be great to have the Jamboard.

Well, I was going to share my Jamboard if that's OK.

I think it might be easier or scroll back and forth.


SPEAKER_28:
Yeah, let's do that.

OK, I have it up there too.

So it's all good if you want to continue.


SPEAKER_02:
OK.

let me share mine because i'm sure you're screaming yeah yeah if it's okay thank you but thank you very much um so okay with the dot we are gonna honor time and i know with the uh with the video on uh youtube it gets a little bit further so hopefully first uh thank you for demoing everyone take a little stretch break whether you have to like put your arms up turn around

You know, just do a quick check in because like I know everyone's been sitting and staring at their screen.

For those who haven't still heard me, my name is Monica Kang.

I'm currently tuning in from D.C.

and really excited to be here.

And so I want to just kudos for everyone and everything that we've done so far.

So if you are not here yet, just want to make sure to join our Jamboard because we're going to have a conversation together.

And I want to check in how you are all doing.

So let me see.

Are you guys able to see mine so far?


SPEAKER_18:
Can we post that Jamboard in general?


SPEAKER_27:
I did, but you pasted in a different link.

Continue.


SPEAKER_02:
Perfect.

Thank you.

So what can we learn from one another?

I know that's been kind of the theme that we already started from this morning's conversation or wherever you are in your time zones.

And I want to kind of expand upon that and have this opportunity where we are going to mingle with one another in a different way.

So kind of the umbrella that I want to start highlighting is, you know, traditionally in the business world and even in complexity, we always talk about the importance of

When we're just used to going about our day-to-day routines, it's so hard to see what else we can do because we like to get comfortable with what we know.

I mean, there's a reason why our brain likes to get us into habit mode because we don't have the time to think about all these different things.

It would be very overwhelming.

But as a result of that, sometimes we forget unless we talk to somebody else first.

in a different place.

And so this activity and conversation we're going to do at the first beginning pieces, I do want to check in and see where you are.

But we I do want to kind of virtually envision ourselves as if we're almost like going into all these different places as if we're in a virtual marketplace, meeting one another, you know, envision a different dialogue, maybe there's going to be some mixed dialogues verbally in your chat conversations or, or in the

video conversations were in your chats and so start tuning in and let me first go ahead and check in with you how you're feeling so Day three and as I have already shared many of us are learning a lot of things If you caught me earlier on Friday I was already saying about how I didn't even know how to use Jamboard properly and I've so appreciated the organizers nudging me like why don't we do Jamboard?

Sean, you're right.

This is now one of my favorite new things.

I'm going to be integrating this into many other things.

And, you know, it's been super fun to kind of tie it together.

So if you're here and currently on slide two with me, you know, take a moment and share what's something that you've learned so far, whether it's something within your team, maybe it's a new topic, maybe it's even a software, maybe it's just that, oh, I never, I didn't know I could stay up for a weekend like this.

Whatever that is, just take a moment to put some notes and thoughts on and how you are feeling and

I want to check in with my team here, a group of friends, to see how everyone else is doing.

So Dan, how are you doing?

What's something new that you learned?


SPEAKER_28:
New ways to arrange windows on monitors.

How about JP?


SPEAKER_21:
Muted, JP.

I'm learning .


SPEAKER_19:
I'm learning the art of conversation and improvisation and, like, adaption very quickly with a live, you know, remote live group.

So it's been a time I haven't done much in my professional life.

I haven't done actually much virtual space.

I know there was, like, all this stuff before.

But now I'm really learning as we're adapting to our new world of remoteness, I feel like

actually a really strong sense of connectivity to wanting to be here.

So it's fantastic.


SPEAKER_02:
Love that.

And Sean, what have you learned?


SPEAKER_18:
I've learned that the Earth is spherical.

and that people aren't always awake and that it's interesting.

One thing I was thinking of last night, I was trying to activate the other side of the Earth.

I was like, how can we develop global teams that have people on both sides of the Earth so that you can have 24-7 progress?

This is a novel.

People do this.

They have remote teams in other countries.

But how can you take something you're trying to work on and kind of pass it to the other side of the earth for a bit while you're sleeping and then it comes back to you and you just get this 24-7 kind of process of progress.

That's what I've been thinking about basically since last night.


SPEAKER_02:
Absolutely.

I think the learning piece just never ends.

I know folks right now, I'm seeing a little bit slower pace, which I take similar to many of what you shared as a compliment because that means they are so deep down in their team conversations,

which is about the right time.

And so whenever you do come across this when you are ready, you know, do take a moment to share where you are right now, what's something new that you're learning, because this is still a whiteboard that's going to be alive, that you can go back anytime and continue to add your thoughts.

And so whether it's new skills, and I know, Dan, if you're sharing that with all the two, three screens that you are sharing, it's super fun to hear.

Oh, yes, we're seeing some charts and comments coming in.

Kind of continuing on that, to give a little bit few minutes for them to share.

You know, JP, tell me a little bit more about what's something that you're really excited to see that you didn't envision happening by day three?


SPEAKER_19:
Something I'm excited to see that I didn't envision happening by day three.

So it's difficult for me to answer that because by nature, I expect the things...

I expect things to happen and I don't know what they are.

So I'm not, I mean, it's, it's maybe it's like Sean, you know, I, Oh yeah, the world is around.

Half the people are asleep.

You know, it's these things, it's, it's, it's kind of the accidents that happen.

Right.

I mean, it's, it's kind of like, I'm used to, I'm used to setting up a jam board and like seeing, seeing the thing populate.

But it's those happy accidents I think that come through that, that, that,

shape our culture and shape who we are in the best way.

So it's like, hi, everybody.

Good evening.

How many out there are raising a toast to us right now because it's 6 PM and they're ending their day and they're just settling back into our space?

So by nature of a lot of what we do, it's inspiring, but it's not unexpected because there's no way to fail.

So I'm just happy to be here.


SPEAKER_02:
I love that.

And it ties back to even way back Friday when you were saying about how it's important to have that childish kind of curiosity.

openness really exploring because that's so true and one of the things that i've highlighted throughout some of my points is that how important it is especially at times like this that we don't walk into things with our own agenda and i appreciate you sharing that because that's a true reflection of how you're navigating but also hopefully what we hope the participants think about as they're working with their teams you know there's probably certain ways in how they usually like to do things

it's gonna look a little different so how do you make sure that you're not letting your gut instinct of like oh but this is a way I know that how it's supposed to work or this is how I like to do things how can we pause for a second and think about how we work together and collaborate and continues to build on that and so continue to share your thoughts I want to now connect to sharing a little bit more what I want to make sure we cover during our conversation today so yes I want to check in how you're all feeling and

But I also want to check in how you're doing as a team.

So in the next slide, I'm going to ask you some questions on where you are as a team.

What are some things that you still need help?

Because I know I've been following, I still missed about another 200 Keybase chats that I'm going to have to follow through.

So there's a lot of chatter and conversations going on.

But I know there's probably a lot more outside because you're continuing those in the Jitsi room.

So

Let's kind of aggregate that because there's probably some single source of truth, as many of you have shared it, patterns that could emerge when we go back to seeing how we're all doing.

And from that, I'm going to now invite you to meet one another in some Jitsi networking session that we will share the link a little bit later.

So stay tuned for that so that you can spend a specific time period where you're going to just meet with random people, talk where they are, ask questions, share briefly about who you are so that you can meet.

And let's bring everyone back again to see where we are.

So with that, let me continue on.

You have these links so you can continue to swipe through at any point.

But the next question I have is,

Diving a little bit deeper, where is my team right now?

So my team still needs help in XYZ and my team is good with ABC.

Take a moment to think about this.

Maybe you can write it for yourselves or maybe you can share it on behalf of your team.

Maybe you're sharing it on behalf of as a facilitator what you're noticing in the different teams that you're noticing.

But take a moment and share some notes and comments or maybe

graphics so that you can express that.

And in the time being, I'm going to check in with our organizers to ask them what they've been noticing.

So Dan, I'm curious to hear from your perspective.

I know you've been monitoring the chats as well as, you know, helping them create the Jitsis.

What are some patterns that you're noticing that you want to make sure that groups are being aware?


SPEAKER_28:
I think that being aware of technological differences is crucial.

And so when the team is just aware that there's going to be a range of technological approaches, there's going to be not just differences in the experience, but also someone's computer just might not work with this one application.

And so what I've seen over the weekend has been that people went from not

figuring out necessarily how to get something done in Jitsi, how do you mute in Jitsi, how do you make a new request channel, all these types of things.

And then as the friction of each of these little micro actions starts to drop, it's like, oh yeah, just join me in this Jitsi or join me in this Keybase room.

And so when I see the friction dropping as we help each other solve our tech issues and as we gain fluency just by going in and out of a lot of different rooms,

I see people just using the kinds of tips and tricks that we picked up, like just adding a few letters at the end of the Jitsi URL to make a new breakout room.

I see people just authentically using it to catalyze their team.

And so that's really where the tech and the interactions come together for me is when we're using a platform where after some little activation energy period, people can really just work the way they want to work.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you for highlighting that.

And it's a true reflection of the question I even started today's conversation of like, what are you learning?

I think it's really okay to acknowledge that, hey, like, it's okay that you feel a little bummed about like, why is this tech problem that I feel like it should be intuitive, causing me a bit of a uncomfortableness.

Because once we navigate that, now, hey, now you have one more thing that you can say that's under your belt.

JP, please.


SPEAKER_19:
That's a big fan of frustration because it means you're feeling something and it means that there is a desire to get to somewhere so you know there's there's

There's a concept in material science, physical science, spin glass, where it's like you have these frozen moments of frustration, and that's why the entire thing is stressed, right?

And then you heat up the material, and then things align to how they're supposed to be.

So frustration is a really important feeling.

I cued on it yesterday.

Follow that feeling and let people know what you need or let people know where you want to be.

And I think that's an essential part of the swarming, forming, norming, et cetera process.

So you're here.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you for adding that.

Sean, anything that you want to add?


SPEAKER_18:
What was the original prompt?

What was the original question?


SPEAKER_02:
We were asking about, thinking about team where we still need help and where to go.

And so I was just, we got into thinking about tech challenges and like how actually frustration is a good reminder.

What else is coming to you as you're noticing how teams are coming together right now in


SPEAKER_18:
I think that we talked a little earlier in the live stream.

Uh, I'm sure people were in their, their team spaces, but we have this really fun analogy of like role-playing parties and like, what role are you playing?

Are you multi-classing?

Are you part wizard part, you know, or whatever?

I think.

like figuring out the roles with respect to each other and where you can have a respected, a valuable contribution to the team that's understood by others.

That's really hard stuff to work out.

And working out on a weekend is like really difficult, but you know, and it takes vulnerability to be able to kind of let the guard down.

So people know where you're at, where you hope to be, what the reality is with everyone else in the group and where they want to be.

And just finding that kind of, you know,

kind of what JP was saying, raise the temperature a little bit, let the molecules wiggle around a little bit, and then kind of see what wells they fall into as the team starts performing today, right?

That is, I think, going to be a source of frustration, but also a source of magic.

That's what I'm really looking forward to.


SPEAKER_28:
And also just to highlight one of these comments on the Jamboard, narrowing down the problem we would like to solve is in the, my team still needs help.

And then there's another one, figuring out the details.

So it's the macro and the micro and the complexity eternal problem is narrowing down the problem to what we'd like to solve and figuring out the details.

And again, I always think what's the reference point?

What is the comparison or the null hypothesis?

The comparison is, I wish I was just working on the perfect level of analysis.

I think we're up here.

I know it needs to be lower.

I know we need to drill down, but we need to narrow it down, figure out the details.

That's what complexity is often confronted with.

But think about the opposite problem, which is like, you're actually below the level of analysis that you need to be working at to make a solution that's going to work through time and across the world.

And then you think, wow, no problem.

We're at the right level of analysis.

And then

all your effort is not going to have the same effect it could because you didn't ask what's the biggest we can think and how do we narrow down?

So reframing all of this means that you go from saying narrowing down is where we want to be because we're starting with the total perspective.

We don't want to be six months down the road and say, oh wait, we didn't even think about the power grid and that's essential for this question.

So start big and narrowing down is where all of the fun is going to happen.

And then you'll know that you came from the deepest possible perspective instead of needing to do this scramble for perspective in six months.


SPEAKER_02:
Absolutely.

And so in innovation, we often use the terminology divergent thinking and convergent thinking.

And essentially, it's the aspect of pretty much the same thing, but in a different language.

See how all these synergies are coming together even in our conversation as we're merging our worlds.

But divergent literally, you know, kind of putting a

kind of a framework um that you know you have to say yes and yes and explore all these crazy things but put a timeline maybe it's that hey in the next hour or so let's just put all the ideas let's not narrow down too fast put out all the things that we can think of all the all the elements all the factors that might influence and then after that

Tipping point.

Let's see.

Okay, well, what are patterns are we seeing so far?

Well, based on this, it sounds like our audience that we want to serve is, you know, those who are minorities, or maybe those who live in urban cities and minorities who can't access to transportation.

I wonder what it would mean.

And now you can start something specific with that.

And then from there, you can converge to continue on and build on that.

Yes, Dan, please.


SPEAKER_28:
This is great for the first 15 minutes.

And I think that the teams that are not deep in their working groups, I think they're all listening.

Would it be okay if I posted in the three Jitsi links into the general chat?

And when I post these three links, what should people do?


SPEAKER_02:
Absolutely.

And that ties to our next slide, which I will be now swiping over as you share those links, which is we want to make sure I'm going to change the order a little bit.

I want to make sure that you get a chance to meet with some of the other folks.

So, yes, there are some folks who are in teens.

Some are individuals who are like, hey, I'm here learning and hanging out and I just want to meet other people.

That's all great.

What we challenge you is like join some of these Jitsi links that we are now putting in the chat so that you get a chance to meet somebody else.

I wanted to make sure we set the framework because I know people are joining us in and getting to see where they are.

And so your mission that we send you off in the next 10, 15 minutes is,

for you to really join one of these Jitsi links you don't have to go with your whole team please actually separate yourself with your team because your intention is to meet somebody new and briefly you know figure out kind of a brief system in the group maybe you know somebody can help set up hey can we all just do a quick intro what have you learned what is something that you want to share and do a quick ask and give because it might be that the whether it's the tech or the knowledge piece that you're struggling with or

There's somebody else in the room that actually could contribute and add to that.

And so with that checking in with Dan, like are the links now available so that the groups are joining?


SPEAKER_28:
Yes.

So what I did is I put four links in their mixer, A, B, C, D. And then on the fifth slide of the jam board, I just wrote a few little lines.

And so you can see that maybe just start out in the column of A, B, C and D.

So, A, sick bugs and COVID information, B, lean food supply and resilience ontologies, C, socio-emotional education impact and COVID impacts mental health, and D, public policy and anyone else.

No strict boundaries here.

You can join other groups.

But the goal here is you're going to practice just talking to other people about what your team has been up to.

And then you'll also get to meet people who you didn't get to interact with as much.

Just practice hearing from other people and maybe taking on board some of their comments or thoughts.


SPEAKER_02:
Absolutely.

Thank you for sharing that.

And a few tips that I want to share as you jump into these rooms and that you probably mute this conversation or you just keep it playing and you just put the sound down.

Before you do that, a few things to highlight is one, just take a moment to make sure that if you are coming from a team side,

That, you know, think about how are you articulating what you're solving and what you're working on?

Is it making sense for somebody who wasn't in your team?

Because that's a perfect opportunity going back to the earlier point I made about the marketplace.

This is a great time to test your pitch and your story.

Does it make sense for somebody who's never heard what your team is working on to see how it's coming about?

Right.

So take that as an opportunity to test out, share and how people are responding.

Are they asking questions like, well, how does that actually work?

I'm like, oh, yes, thank you for doing that.

And these are other things.

Those are all amazing data points.

Your mission, again, is to learn and collect those data points because you want to bring all of that back to your team in preparation of the presentation that is happening in a few hours so that you can pivot and iterate and add to that.

The second piece of advice I want to just highlight is just make sure that it does not become a monologue.

uh let's make sure everyone in the room takes turn getting a chance to share their thoughts and perspectives so that way you build on that and if you feel like hey i learned a lot from this group you can join on to another another uh group because now we have abcd you have options so say hello learn something contribute but our goal is that you cross pollinate so that you can learn something new by being out

of your original group that you first started with.

And for those who are not in a group, that's great too.

Your mission is to meet as many people and learn from these different aspects.

Sean?


SPEAKER_18:
I just wanted to say bye-bye live stream.

I'm going to hop in these real quick and just start doing some micro adjustments.

It'll be fun.

It's been a great time.


SPEAKER_28:
Yeah, Sean, just to add on that, just in general, answer any text questions.

Just go to the rooms.

Just make sure that it's happening.

And we're just going to be chilling and talking.

Thanks so much.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_28:
Cool.

So is this something that you've practiced in another context with the mixing teams and what kinds of outcomes have you seen in entrepreneurship or policy or anywhere?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I know this is one of the favorite approaches that I love doing because what I found, especially even in my experience in innovation and entrepreneurship, it is so easy for us to stay where we are comfortable with our own group of circle of friends, right?

Like

oh i already know what my team looks like i already know what my industry people thinks like and you know it takes time even navigating that but when we do so we kind of forget to see what actually works elsewhere and so the first wake-up call even for me was actually when i kind of transitioned from nuclear weapons security to entrepreneurship i realized how tricky it was for people to for me to not only explain about my nuclear work but to explain my entrepreneurship work to the nuclear and the number one thing i constantly went back to was just thinking about like

Is there any activity or like a way, not just improv or role play, because some people don't like that, you know, like it's a great process.

But like, how can I take an additional yes and approach?

Like, how can I integrate that so that people don't like that traditional, you know, improv or theater kind of work?

to still cross-pollinate so that they get exposed to different opinions, meet different people, but have fun in that process.

And I found that an activity like this, whether it's through a weekend event like this or in my teaching that I do when I was an adjunct professor teaching entrepreneurship, I found this to be a powerful way because it pushes people to think about

oh wow now that i have to explain this to like dan or like jp who has never heard of it like and they're raising their hand and they're like frowning i'm like oh that's customer feedback like i'm not articulating well enough but if they're smiling they're like okay something's working how do i make sure i find more people who's thinking like that and so it inspired me to think about how do i keep adding that framework well for other things that it continues to do and every time whether it's something like this the structure has slightly changed and that's where the beauty is

And so, yes, please.

Dan, do you want to add something?


SPEAKER_27:
J.P., any thoughts?


SPEAKER_19:
I'm a fan of saying no, because I'm just, I'm... What's a nucleation question around, which I can organize here?


SPEAKER_28:
Well, just to give a little update on the timing for what's gonna happen on this live stream, we're just gonna be talking while the people are mixing in the four Jitsi rooms till 11 or as long as they want, because there's no end.

It's always just these Jitsi links are free, no account, just jump in.

So hang out and then return to your team.

And then at 11.10, Blue is going to come back onto the live stream, our facilitator.

And then at noon, we're going to have DFB Center back on.

So we'll have a few more facilitators coming through, talking about different aspects of complexity.

But while we have Monica and, you know,

what what can we do to distill some of the the moments and the insights that we're gleaning here just as conference organizers as facilitators as participants how do we make sense and reintegrate a sort of like 72 hour intense experience how do we reintegrate that with our other friends and teams that weren't here


SPEAKER_02:
I love that you asked that because that's actually a question I was going to ask back.

So you kind of went ahead and asked me back.

So I'll kickstart on it and I would love to open the umbrella for both of you because one thing that I found when I both, I know you guys are organizing this event, but when I, even for me, when I organize weekend events, it's always a bit of a journey.

And that's why I, you know, I asked that question even earlier, you know,

what are some surprises or how does day three feels and how do we make sure we celebrate?

Because there's just so much that happens.

And as a result of that, I think going back to, you know, Dan, your point, when it ends, there's a bit of a like, what happened?

I had such a powerful weekend and like, I'm now going back to normal routine.

Like, wait, like something doesn't feel right.

And so one of the things that I encourage people to think about a few, I guess a few things is, which is one, as you're constantly learning through this, always ask the question back in your mind of like, how can I integrate this into back to where I am, where my work is, uh, where my, where my friends and families are right now.

Um,

And of course, number two, how would I continue to build these relationships that I met and build on what I'm learning this weekend to expand upon that, right?

Because yes, like that's great.

You had a fantastic weekend.

We are having a blast too, but you know, this doesn't stop as, as you know, all of the organizers and facilitators have highlighted, this is part of your journey.

You know, life does not stop just because you like ended one day and there's,

it's like a river.

And so one of the things that I hope you constantly think about is that whether it's from your team, maybe it's somebody you had a really blast conversation in one of the Jitsi conversation you're having right now, and you tune into this later, or maybe it's somebody just connected on Keybase, whatever that form is, build on that, grow on that, because that's, I think, where the long-term magic is.

And I think, frankly, it's moments like this where you walk away and not only do you feel enriched, but

you find really enriching relationships.

And I feel like I've made some new friends that I'm super excited to stay in touch.

And I think that's something that it really empowers to think about.

How do you bring that back into contribute?

But JP, curious to hear your thoughts.

Yes.


SPEAKER_19:
Yeah, for me, I mean, this is very much, I mean, very much about the journey, not the destination on kind of a,

what do we learn and what do we, what do we gain and what do we gather in?

Um, I mean, for me and, you know, it sounds like for you as well, like you've learned how to use Jamboard, right?

I mean, that's, that's one of these valuable skills that we go forward with.

And like, um, in this space, I'm learning how to be a host for, which I, which I just suddenly realized, like, that's, that's like where the, where the, there is right.

Um, I'm, I'm kind of used to, um,

I'm used to talking with people one-on-one and like jumping down, like Sean is out there right now jumping down into the groups.

And I think that's a really, really neat space to be.

And it's like,

For an event like this that we've done as a project, right?

This is like our Complexity-Faced project.

It's what muscles are you building?

What skills are you learning?

Even if it's like one takeaway where, oh, suddenly, you know, you can use Jamboard to create groups or you can use Jamboard to help coordinate groups or Jitsi is a really nice place to be because da-da-da-da-da.

You don't know how those things are going to impact what you do later in life and later in your projects, later in your professional space, later in your personal space.

And that's where a lot of the important and cool stuff, important both in the sense of professional development, but also just important for a healthy approach to doing things.

Like this is staying with the times.

it's very much the journey as well as the destination.

Destination is kind of the gold, but it's all of those things that you pick up along the way.

So this space for me is just acting as a really, really powerful reminder of that.

So I'm,


SPEAKER_28:
I had a thought there about the integration.

I think a really powerful tool for reintegrating this with your colleagues or with your friends or people who you're learning from or teaching to is when you share a direct experience from this conference about your own transformation or someone else's transformation, it does a few things.

First, it makes it accessible and relatable because it's really something that happened to a real person.

We're not just talking about, well, there's a citation and if you go down the rabbit hole, there's a deep insight.

It's like this happened where a person who didn't think that they could do this just stepped up to the plate and they excelled.

It's relatable and it's accessible because it really happened.

And then what's also powerful about that is it can provide direct value.

Like the conclusion that somebody reached can be directly valuable.

Hey, people realize they can use Jitsi for a free video conference that you can live stream, or people realized you can use Keybase for a free encrypted solution instead of another platform.

but also by showing the process you provide indirect value.

When you say something like, you know, I never thought I'd be talking to a food systems expert from Southeast Asia at 6 AM on Sunday, but then when they realized that Jitsi could be used for video conferencing, it's like, wow, it gives indirect access of people who aren't here right now to understand how connecting across these spaces

and showing from here to here is where it happened.

And it was all in the in-between where the complexity and the growth happened.


SPEAKER_02:
Absolutely.

Absolutely.

And so, you know, I know groups are still in their conversations, but I want to show this page because whenever you do get a chance to come back, take a moment and stop by and share some of your post-its and thoughts and, you know, how did it go?

What were some things that you learned from your group conversations?

And what are some interesting insights that you found?

And I know it's really great to see that you'll be thinking about how that ties into your personal life.

and professional life experience, as well as the people that you time together.

And so I'm kind of checking in.

I want to make sure for those who are hanging out here by chance and like, okay, what else would you be able to share?

I thought it'd be great if maybe we take a second and talk about presentation tips.

I know teams are kind of split in dividing up work.

So I want to take a few minutes to highlight on that because that's kind of my jam as well.

And something that I want to check in from the organizers, what other things they have to share.

But

few things that i want to start with is that i know there's not a lot of time so one advice that i share is even before you mediating these post-its is just think about start with a deadline and go backwards

I think often when we think about pitch practice or communication, we start thinking about, oh, what do I need to say?

How do I prepare?

But in the midst of that, we might forget about, okay, when are you actually delivering it?

Who is it for?

And so I would even start with that, like, okay, thinking about whatever time you're looking at this by the time you come across, how much time do you have left before you present?

Is it 30 minutes?

Is it three hours?

Is it four hours?

Whatever that time scale is.

Take a moment to think about that and backtrack and prioritize where you need to improve.

And then you can think about how you decide because when you show up and share your story, share your presentation of what your team has been working on, where you are so far, which I understand people are still gonna be sharing what they have done so far and how they improve upon,

that's is gonna that will be a lot more fun and engaging because you're gonna feel it out of commerce state because you have time to process and think about it okay so with that being said i want to kind of dive a little bit deeper into a few things which is one do you actually know who your audience is yes it is a virtual event we don't know who is watching but you should

potentially actually speak to a specific audience when you're presenting because you are solving your problem for a particular audience so stay that at the very beginning maybe you're saying that hey I am challenging I am working on child education for ages who's in elementary school who was with a single parent okay

Now, even for those who are listening, even if they don't qualify, they are not your audience, they can think about that avatar and think about, oh, I wonder what this avatar or this person would think about this solution or this challenge that they are about to share, right?

So it makes it easier, but it makes it clear for you in how you're communicating, which goes to number two, are you making sure that it's storytelling?

We remember better when it's stories.

Don't try to overwhelm the audience with all these jargons and terminologies.

Yes, we know that you've done a lot of work this weekend, but sometimes saying more than less is really powerful.

Three, think about a core flow structure.

These are a few things that I found it always helpful, and there's many different ways you can do it as well.

But I recommend starting with the problem.

What is the specific problem you're solving?

How are you solving it?

Why is this unique?

Oh, yes.

Thank you for adding that.

Why is this unique?

Where do you still need work?

And why is your team uniquely doing this that no other team can, right?

Think about your team's diversity and what you bring together as a team.

And as a result, what is the clear call to action?

Are you saying that, hurrah, this is where we are and like, please support us or hurrah, this is where it is.

Please email us, right?

Having that clear call to action makes it easier and

empower your audience to be excited for what you are working on to support you which goes to number four you know I could have done any of these conversation you if you have seen me since Friday at any point you know I've tried to be intentional about the energy that I present I care about having fun and I want you all to have fun and share that energy when I show up and

That's something I think a lot about because, you know, I could do this very same conversation with a complete lack of energy.

I feel like, yep.

OK, so, guys, we're going to just talk about number four.

Your energy matters right now.

That's even for just a split second.

That just feels so different.

So you're working on a serious problem.

You have solutions.

We want to hear how exciting that is.

So express it, you know.

we understand there's still lots of loopholes that you want to fill in that you need to navigate.

But think about through that energy of expression, we can learn where to be improved.

And at times that means you share that through visuals, like me just putting that in text.

But sometimes I like to usually put like just an image and say, look at the billion dollar problem here.

If you were like, whoa, look at that image of that billions of trash or trillions of trash, where is that?

Now you've echoed, and that's another way to say more with less.

And as a result, make sure who are you, right?

Who are you as a team?

How are you showing your strength?

Because with all of that, if you are just saying and trying to copy what other people are doing or like, you know, trying to sound as if somebody else, then it's probably not gonna come across the right way.

And so I hope these are tips of advice, whether it's this presentation or any other presentation you continue to do, because we are doing a lot

on video with where we are right now with COVID-19.

It's so important.

So yes, we're seeing some additional things.

Be authentic is so crucial and, you know, just continue to practice, practice, practice.

As you know, Dan and

JP and Sean and the organizers and others have said, this flow that you are seeing, even though we seem like there's some unexpected things or a different part, they've really put a lot of thought into the practice and put a lot of thought in the process.

And even for me, when I show up, I think about how the flow shows up.

So that was a mouthful of a lot of things, but I just wanted to make sure you're all covered up.

Again, you can just rewatch this anytime when you need any type of presentation tips, but I hope this is helpful as you think about how you narrow it down.

So circling back to Dan.


SPEAKER_28:
Yeah, it's really helpful, Monica, and it will really be helpful for those who are watching it on replay and they want to get caught up.

How do we assess how well our presentation is going or our pitch or our research proposal, whatever our deliverable is?

We're going to need to convey it in a short version, the elevator pitch or whatever it's called in each field.

How do we assess how it's going during or afterwards, especially in a digital context?


SPEAKER_02:
To follow up on that, are you asking the context of after the weekend as team continues to form under the assumption that they work with their same team?


SPEAKER_28:
Just whether it's really informal in a mixer or whether it's the 10 minute presentation slot that each group will have, which we'll give more details on later.

But whatever the format is, how can we make sure that we've kind of followed through with our swing?

That we didn't just practice, practice, practice, deliver it, and then check out.

How do we follow through and make sure that it really gets where it needs to go?


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you for asking that and adding that note.

You know, that's why if you are not here right now and in the marketplace, I hope you are accidentally practicing all of this because that's actually where you do.

When you talk to other people, you see their facial reaction.

You see how they respond.

And I know virtually it's a little different where many of you will be pitching virtually and you can't see how the crowd is going to react.

And so you kind of have to trust your gut instincts.

So make sure before you go,

other than practice make sure you practice that with somebody else talk to somebody maybe within your team talk to somebody if you have somebody at home can you just say it out loud for five minutes and see if that person can understand you try those different scenarios especially in the presentation setting because that would help you think about how that is being shared to get to the point of how it's being communicated and so talking to somebody in person if not

Somebody virtually helps.

But if you can't do that and you still want to get assessment, another way to think about it is think of the energy flow.

The simplest thing is, at the end of the day, did you address what needs to be addressed?

Did you pace yourself in the process?

And what's your beginning, climax, and end?

When we have those pillar points laid out,

People forget we have three second memory.

I mean, like there's a lot there's a lot of things we're going to say and you're going to forget.

And that's completely OK, because that is called human nature.

And so it's important as a presenter.

The trick is that you want to think about what's the beginning, climax and the end.

And then, of course, if you can practice that in front of someone, that's great.

And as you continue to build on this after even this event.

Continue to think about those elements because you're going to be sharing this and continue to problem solve with people who have never thought about it or who thought about it in a different way.

How are you going to convince them and bring value to them when they are saying like, huh, I never thought about that?

So Dan, did that answer the question?


SPEAKER_28:
Yeah, I think that really helps.


SPEAKER_27:
What do you think about that, JP?


SPEAKER_19:
I think that's the art to it, isn't it?

You know, there's a certain way of describing things where you have to convince others and you also have to kind of convince yourself.

And it really helps to have something solid to work on.

As I look at this from a, I guess, the team complexity standpoint, right, that's the moment where things actually kind of hit the ground and you commit to it.

So I think that just that we were talking about different wavelengths or different frequencies, different time scales, right?

So that's your first time when things actually kind of become what you're going to channel into and what you're going to commit down into is when you actually kind of formalize it into like, well, here's kind of what we're doing.

So I'm looking forward to seeing what comes on pretty shortly, what comes out of all of that kind of formalization process.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you for adding that.

And I want to be mindful of time because I know teams are still in conversation and individuals are in conversation as they're exploring mingling.

And I hope they are learning something new.

So be able to come back and check in and see what comes to mind because this everything that we're going through, this is not just for the weekend.

These are all things that you can continue to build on.

wherever you are and where you want to continue to go because we need more people for problem solving with perspective.

And so kind of two things to add on that is, you know, I thought it was really great when we even thought about how much, you know, why folks are feeling that it's taking a lot of time to even figure out what problems to solve.

That is okay because Thomas Edison said that is what the best way to problem solve, right?

If you had an hour to solve a problem, I would spend 55 minutes thinking about the problem

and five minutes thinking about the solution because often when we jump too fast to the solution oh we might actually be solving something that's not exactly what it is um and so think about that and you know through that process take a moment to think about how are you

the root cause and just not the effect with it.

And so with that, again, this link would be live and I'll be around.

So ping me if you have specific help needed, whether you stop by some of the networking sessions to see how you are doing.

And with that, I think circle back to you, Jonathan.

Thank you for having me back.


SPEAKER_28:
Thank you, Monica.


SPEAKER_27:
Thanks, Monica.

Welcome, Blue.

Hi.

Hello.

How are you doing?


SPEAKER_25:
I'm good.

How are you guys?

Good.

Riding the adrenaline wave.


SPEAKER_28:
I, you know, third wind, fourth wind, et cetera.

Is there anything you wanted to lead off with as far as what you've been experiencing or thinking?


SPEAKER_26:
No, I mean, just like, I'm impressed with the thoughtfulness of the group and how like the collective is coming together to come up with these different ideas and approach solving them.

And I think it seems really neat and, um,

like a good seeding opportunity for lots of projects to go forward.


SPEAKER_28:
Cool.

How do you see this space from dimensions of innovation or from inclusion, whatever angles are important, how do you see this space differing than other spaces you've participated in?


SPEAKER_26:
I think that the effort towards inclusion is very real, right?

Like, I think that people like the facilitators and the organizers have all made like a genuine, sincere effort to make sure that everyone is, you know, gathered into some kind of project, engaged and, you know, actively participating in what's happening, where sometimes it doesn't always seem like that.

It seems like I think that the outreach here towards that effort has been greater than where I've seen other places.

But I mean, I think that the nature of the space, like being an online virtual space, like just kind of requires that, right?

Like there's, you don't always, you know, in a physical space, you can see if someone is like left out or not engaged or out, like not participating with a group, but like in a virtual space, there's not that same kind of ability to visualize it, right?

So it's different in that sense, I think.


SPEAKER_19:
Yeah, that's, um, yeah, there we go.

That's one thing I'm, I'm encountering right now is I know it's, I know there's people out there.

I know that they're tuned in and I know that they're listening.

I know that there's a lot happening.

It's just, I see about that much of what's going on right now.

And so it's really refreshing to know that like there's a whole galaxy out there kind of like of productivity going on.

So I'm really, really, um,

excited to see what's gonna break in the, not break in the broken sense, but break in the way sense, right, in a couple minutes here.


SPEAKER_26:
Yeah.

Super exciting.


SPEAKER_28:
And where the generative model, this idea we've come back to again and again, that our brains aren't just taking in camera data, microphone data, doing some classification and then selecting action.

It's more like the sense data, the things that we are experiencing are updating our model of the world.

And so we can actually just think really hard that really what's generating all these key-based messages are humans at their keyboard.

And what's generating JP and Blue's face talking to me is really them having this conversation.

And so it just wouldn't be plausible for us to be meeting for coffee right now, but we're really sharing the time.

And so I just try to, you know,

from the top down, just imagine that all these contributions are real authentic humans who also are making that decision to hit the enter button or not, or hit the emoji or not.

And so every single interaction that comes to my visibility is like a tip of an iceberg because really the generative model that is the community goes way beyond just the number of people who are watching the live stream concurrently or the number of people who are clicking things.

It's just something that's deeper than that.


SPEAKER_19:
For me, it's like we're very much getting into the creation of this new space.

I mean, it's when the things that you've been theorizing about, you know, creating this virtual, you know, entire, what I've been calling like a real time global conference, real time live global conference, right?

That's when things like, when we start to

and we start to make it happen.

So as I'm learning, this is our little window, this is our little box that we're working in.

And we have chunks and chunks and chunks out there that form and reform.

And I'm really enjoying that cross-pollination phase right now.

Like we had the model before the model actually hits the real world and where we have to test out and verify what we're thinking about.

So I'm on board.

I'm really coming along.

This is a cool space to be.


SPEAKER_28:
And after we departed from Santa Fe, we had this month-long experience that we're sort of emulating aspects of here.

And we had the group presentations on the last day.

And then after a period of time, there was a request to have a white paper or something like a draft.

And so people, no worries, Blue, back off.

Technical difficulties.

Perfect.

So after that month long interval, I didn't even get to catch up with the drafts or the proposals or the progress by so many of these teams.

And so what I'm really looking forward to is seeing these explore channels stay active because all of us are still exploring these topics.

And then I know that in general, people will still be posting progress updates and people will still be looking for teams.

And so it's the live viewer now for who this information is for.

It's for the asynchronous viewer who's going to be three minutes delayed or three hours delayed just because of their schedule.

But it's also the realization that the kinds of backends that we're working on in the approaches that we're making are like always open.

There's always the ember of the community.

And then once in a while, in person or simultaneously online, we're going to have these sort of like big flame outs.

But it's always warm when there's things like this to read and to learn from.


SPEAKER_26:
This is the first online conference that I've ever had a chance to participate in.

I'm going to do another one later in the summer that's a two-week course.

But opportunities have popped up, and it's cool to see how it happens in virtual space versus

um you know real life like actual space so it's different and it's it's neat to see it unfold and shrink the world even more right like so you know our globalism is it has like maybe caused our situation like the globalism like the globalist you know attitude of everyone but it's also um maybe like what's going to get us out of the situation the world's going to shrink even more


SPEAKER_19:
I mean, you'll go forward to that conference utilizing aspects of what we've done here, right?

And then that conference can form best practices for what we'll do in the future.

I mean, this is rapidly inventing the space of the post-COVID-19 world.

I mean, this is kind of, you know, thrilled and honored to be a part of this entire process.

So that's great.

You know, one thing that I've always been stuck on, you know, I really want to get feedback at some point from members of the program, members who are out there, you know, I'm really curious to see where our improvements could be, what we're doing really well.

Blue, what do you think about, what do you think we've done well?

What do you think of everything so far?


SPEAKER_26:
um you know like i'm not i'm not really participating so i don't really know like right so like you know i carve time out of like my crazy work schedule to kind of come and facilitate um because i don't really have the like the opportunity to engage fully in a project which requires like i would have to take time off of work and like i just don't i'm too busy right now so i'm curious also to see like i mean i think that from the participant angle um i don't know like you know

it seems like we had a huge like sign up and like maybe half of the people dropped off.

So that's kind of like interesting to see and weird to know.

But then I wonder like what the numbers are going to come out to be finally.

Right.

Like, so it just seems like in the, in the facilitation sessions, they were like,

you know there was not as many people as i as i thought and like even on the live stream on friday night like it was like half right so i just wonder like who have who's caught up and who's behind and is there lag and um what what the global community is like versus what i see like is there like a whole bunch of stuff happening while i'm sleeping i mean i have a feeling that there is but i just i'm curious to see like what

what that's going to look like i mean so you know in terms of retention it's like everybody has this good intention to sign up right like and then they sign up and it's like yeah you don't have time for that right now i'm too busy or whatever right

So I wonder what that the drop off really is or if that's that's reflected here.

But I think that the people that are engaged are and have been engaged from the time that the livestream started.

I think we're doing a really good job with retention there in a situation where this is all voluntary and everyone's coming together and trying to work together to achieve different goals and get new ideas.

I think that we've done a really good job at facilitating that.

But I just wonder,

how like you could hook people and like reel them in for that initial like you know once you get people into the friday night they're like committed right but but i just wonder like what what that there's like a breaking point there it seems like we had a lot of drop off anyway so i don't know that's the interesting part about a uh a virtual space um the online space generally like um there's studies and rules about this where it's like expect 99 of your


SPEAKER_19:
expect 99 percent of people who go to a forum to not participate and it's like this this fat tail distribution of people who are lurking people who are you know um people who lurk people who are registered people who comment people who create and it's this this like 0.01 percent of people create and then it filters back to back from there um and that's like as as the end of any

of any online group goes to infinity, like expect that distribution to occur.

So this is a really interesting space where, you know, we, we had a great number of signups, um, you know, for, you know, honestly, pretty short notice that between the time we got out there and a couple of various, uh, energy barriers to get to participating.

So we, we have, you know, join, join Jitsi.

We have our kind of conventions and Jitsi.

So there were a couple of things that, um,

people had to actively do to, to be a part of this.

So through all those things, and this is like came together really quickly as like COVID-19 hit, let's throw the entire conference online.

So by that measure, I think this is the seed of what grows further.

And, you know, having Daniel had said earlier, like the, the, the,

Structures are robust from 4,000 to 4,000 people.

We can scale it up and scale it down as needed.

So I think that's a really neat place to be.

And as a first pass, as a first attempt at what I've been describing as our project, I think this is a really neat space to be.

So glad you could be a part of it.

This is something we're actively inventing.


SPEAKER_28:
Thanks for the feedback and thanks for participating in all the ways that you are able to.

And just to kind of expand on that discussion about retention, because retention and participation without barriers to accessibility is really the question in the online space.

how do we go from a thousand people on email list to some fraction who are at the next level to the section of people who feel comfortable posting that that kind of drop-off curve and flattening that curve if if we must um that's really what um so much of our thought process was about and we discussed okay so in a physical located conference

People don't the retention is kind of taken for granted because if somebody has taken a plane and they already bought the return ticket, they're not going to leave early.

And so really what's happening there is you have the financial and logistical barriers to the person showing up.

But once they're there, the retention is extremely easy.

Right.

But really the costs are distributed to the attendees.

It's actually like a regressive way to pay for the conference, to pay for retention, because you're outsourcing the hotel and the travel and all these other costs to the people who actually need to make it into the room.

So it institutes a lot of barrier just financially, logistically, it creates a totally different space.

So we had a lot of discussions in the weeks and months leading up to this saying, well, should we do a deposit?

And then if people contribute, then they get the deposit back.

Or should we do a donation and then we'll split it up in some pooled way or we'll choose a charity to donate or people need to donate $20 to a charity or we'll make it $5.

And the reality is that for us, there was kind of two clear modes that separated out.

One of them was money isn't an accessibility barrier.

It will be free for everybody who can make it.

And that's what we decided to do was for this one, just say it has to be free.

If we have a PayPal button for $20, it's not like we're recouping even a fraction of the money that could have been happening through some other avenue.

Not that that really matters, but once money is introduced, it really changes the game.

And that's kind of like the idea, you ask your friend to help you move and then you buy them the pizza and they're like, wow, I didn't expect a pizza.

But if you gave them 10 bucks for eight hours of work, they'd say, wait, what?

Only $10?

So-

You got to go free or you have to ask what the value is.

And one other thought that I actually learned at SFI about this was the experiment with the Israeli preschool where some of the parents were picking up their kids late.

And so it was taxing the support staff because people were showing up late to pick up their children.

And so they instituted a fine.

they said if you're late you're gonna pay a fine um and and so what it actually did was rather than disincentivize people said oh okay 10 bucks but then i get to work for another hour or something like that and so by making it something where it was quantifiable it had this backlash that actually uh made it all about quantitative and once it's ten dollars per hour well if i'm making more than ten an hour the kid there

And so how to create a space where we're having people that are retained even though they're not traveling somewhere, so they're not physically imprisoned in a conference room somewhere.

And there's also a tremendous breadth of the time zones and the experiences, the communication styles

all those spaces coming together, it's really that kaleidoscope and that critical mass and complexity that we wanted to stick with to the end and beyond, rather than kind of opting out to simplify it and saying, well, you know, if someone pays us X amount of money, then it doesn't really matter if they're disengaged halfway through because we already, we got the money.

So, so what?

And then, yeah, I mean, there's a lot that could be said there.


SPEAKER_26:
Well, so a different format on two fronts.

Right.

OK, so I've sent my kids to a daycare where they find you literally five dollars a minute.

Right.

So like that gets pretty expensive.

Ten minutes late is 50 bucks.

Like, I don't know.

I mean, I guess there are people that make like more than five dollars a minute, which is like three hundred dollars an hour.

I mean, I'm definitely like I feel like I'm in the upper class of people that are in my region and I'm not making that much.


UNKNOWN:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_26:
I don't know.

I mean, so the daycare, that was highly effective, right?

The $5 a minute fine.

Um, but the, uh, other thing is like the conference that I'm participating in that's later in the summer, it's end of June and the beginning of July and it's two weeks and it's, um, you know, full time and you've got to get around the, um, you know, time zone barriers and stuff.

But, um, it is, uh, um,

they're paying us right to participate so that's the other model right and like you i guess get paid at the end it'd be interesting if we got paid at the beginning i don't know if like what the expectation is there i've done this one before uh can you guys hear me see me am i breaking up looks good looks good thank you

All right.

So the one that I said, I've done this workshop before and it was like you said, paid hotel and paid travel and paid, you know, they paid for everything for us and they didn't pay us to actually be there.

And it's interesting, two years later, because of covid, they're paying us to participate because they're not giving us the experience of the airfare and the hotel and all that other stuff.

So I wonder how the model will work.

You know, before it was just like they just paid for everything and there was no.

But it'll be interesting if we have to wait till after.

the program, you know, because I wonder how they're going to get around that drop off.

I'm curious to see.


SPEAKER_28:
It's a great question.

And also just a few more notes.

You really brought up the right question, which is the Friday night where we had about, let's say, 75 people who were watching the live stream.

Even for some, it was 2 a.m.

or 6 a.m.

when it was 5 p.m.

for us.

But

That's how many we had, about 75 who are watching it.

And that was from around 140 or 150 people who indicated that they could set the time aside in the one or two or three weeks in advance, which they had signed up.

so that conversion rate for a free event um you know it's like we did some fermi estimation we said should we expect uh a drop off of 10 of 50 or of 90 and really it's just all filters because we're not giving a swag back i mean we're not giving you a certificate you're not getting a gift

If you participate, you're going to get what you put in and 100 times more.

Because every minute that's spent during this weekend talking to these people and meeting them while their attention is also there, it's leveraged 100 times over because the connections continue so deep into the future.

And so I understand that schedules come up and that things happen.

And so rather than saying, well, how can we make this 30%, a 10% drop off?

I just think everybody gets what they get out of it.

Even the people who had the last minute emergency and they just couldn't participate at all.

Not only can they watch these live streams and still communicate with us and the facilitators as well, but like the community is now alive.

And so now when people are ready, whether they just want to be consuming content, whether they just want a place where they're not going to get buzzword science, where they're not going to get buzzword inclusion, where we're just going to stick with the difficulty and try to continue the discussion in a really rigorous and also accepting way, the people who want to consume that type of content, I hope will find a niche for them.

And the people who want to just throw a question or two to a live stream or to a text channel, there's a space for them.

But as we're discovering around the world, there's a group of people who wouldn't have been linked up before.

They wouldn't have been linked up in any conceivable way.

But here they are talking about these really creative projects.

And so, again, it's what's the reference point?

The reference point for me for 75 people on a live stream wasn't the 140 people who registered.

It's the zero people who would be listening to us talk.


SPEAKER_26:
Or the 10 people, right?

Or whatever, like the normal Sunday, you know, as we've been meeting in the past.

It is the benefits are definitely nonlinear, right?

So it's definitely more than I think like the you put in the investments bigger.

or the reward is bigger than the investment, sorry.

I'm a little bit sleep deprived, just a little bit.


SPEAKER_28:
And really the one month residential program at Santa Fe in some ways is the extreme case of setting aside where people taking a month from their family and from their work, it's a massive ask.

And that's why there's such an incredible amount of bonding and of change.

It's a massive ask.

And so it's just like we have high risk, high reward, low risk, low reward, everything in between.

What's cool about these online conferences in one way, also to speak to the point about globalism and about what are the failings or what is the future of globalism?

is it'll be possible to have this always active, dynamic, and reorganizable community where if a crisis happens in an area, we have so many people speak about disaster response and about education and about supply chains, logistics, all these things that are, while they are long-term problems, there's also like, okay, but right now it's about this one place.

And so to be able to have a network of people, whether it's their fluency in the tech or their fluency with a group formation and facilitation from a complexity perspective, where some people can be participating locally, they can be in a room and we can video conference in,

and provide the kinds of facilitation tips that are kind of just a dime a dozen in these live streams, but extremely valuable to groups that might be going about disaster relief from a perspective that's not informed by complexity.

And again, not that we have the best approach, just that we would be ready to deploy into these contexts where we could make a difference with all these things that we're talking about this weekend.


SPEAKER_26:
Yeah, the Santa Fe model.

So the conference is interesting because, you know, you it's a lot of skin in the game, right?

Like it's also high risk.

It's a month, right?

The program's a month, but it costs money and you've got to figure out a way to pay for it.

So sometimes you get sponsored by your institution or whatever.

But, you know, I mean, for a lot of people, it's cash out of pocket.

And so it's a huge investment that way.

So it's interesting, the summer program that I'm doing, it's flipped the other way, right?

So if you get accepted, it's completely paid for, and it's also a month.

And it's interesting, it'll be interesting to see the, it's the Diverse Intelligence Summer Institute, JP.

So I think you know,

Erica and Jacob and those guys that started it.

They actually came to the summer school in 2017 to kind of look at the model and examine it and take forward into their summer program.


SPEAKER_19:
Jacob Hunter?


SPEAKER_26:
Erica Cartmill and Jacob, man, I forget his last name.


SPEAKER_21:
Jacob.


SPEAKER_26:
But they're married, Erica and Jacob.

And they came in 2017 and they watched, they observed.

Do you remember them?

Yeah?

Yeah.


SPEAKER_20:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_26:
So, but this program, it's interesting because they pay you, right?

So it's also a huge commitment.

And it's like the money is like, it's almost exactly the inverse of the Sound Effect Institute.

But either way, it's like a huge reward, you know, for your month investment or a huge amount of skin in the game for your month investment.

So it's kind of a similar format.

It's not quite as long.

Their Summer Institute was like three weeks when I went in 2018.

And then

I didn't go last year, but this year it was going to be like again three weeks and they've cut it to two and then they want to do another week like in the winter in person.

And they are going to give us some extra time like Santa Fe to work on the projects, you know, at our own pace or whatever in like a virtual space, I guess.

So it'll be interesting, because I know Santa Fe canceled their summer school.

They didn't want to experiment with it.

I guess the thing about when other people pay you, you kind of are expected to deliver a good product.

If you're paying to go to the Santa Fe Institute, you expect it to be worth it, right?

Whereas the Diverse Intelligence Institute, they're paying us.

So if they fail and it's a total blunder, well, at least we still got paid for it.

I guess it's like the attitude.

So it'll be interesting to see how that comes out.

And I'll have to share that with you, JP, because I'm sure if this continues, it could go on for a long time.

I mean, I know they're optimistic about a vaccine, but it could be if there's no vaccine.

I mean, we have yet to ever develop a vaccine for any kind of coronavirus vaccine.

So, and the flu vaccine has to be redeveloped every year, right?

So it's kind of like, you know, these RNA viruses are rapidly mutating and, you know, evolving under selective pressure.

So, I mean, we'll see.

This could be the new world order, like living or being in that kind of confined space is kind of high risk, right?


SPEAKER_19:
I mean, I think there's a possibility of...

You know, there's a possibility of success, there's a possibility of failure, or there's something in between.

I mean, that's the way I've addressed it.

I mean, but the neat thing is...

creation of new viable models as well.

So like this fully online conference, for instance, is like, would I do this otherwise?

I mean, frankly, yeah.

It's a blast for a weekend.

And even if I could go out and meet people, I mean, this is a really effective way of getting just a neat hackathon together.

I can imagine this model being used for like, you know, this is a hackathon.

I could see it being used for educational purposes, et cetera.

interesting about the, the, the one you're attending where it's, they pay you because that's a, I mean, all these things are, all these things are fundamentally models, right?

Right.

Um, like it's nice to have a funding source of that.

And, you know, it all depends like this, this, we were able to, to accomplish as a free event by merit of enthusiasm, like here's the tools, here we go.

And, you know, Sean and Sean Daniel, actually amazing, like,

technical organizers as well.

So there's like months of my talking about the backend for all this.

And you know, like I'm, I'm, I can see a tuition model.

I can see a, you know, if you have some kind of benefactor in the background who'd like provide support for these things, I can see a,

Even split model, I can see a constructed model where you're getting paid to do that.

So it's all these different things.


SPEAKER_28:
Yeah, well, if we could have paid the facilitators and the participants, of course, I wouldn't have vetoed that one.

It wasn't in the cards.

It wasn't in our Bitcoin wallets at this time.

But I think that what we're seeing is that a lot of these strategies will generalize across silos.

So for a corporate education context, yeah, it makes sense to get everybody's buy in and their follow through with an appropriate value in fiat currency.

There's going to be other cases where I think there's always going to retain an element of service and of helping these crises because the questions that people are coming towards, I'm not sure what the deliverables will be.

Some might be a research paper or a report or a product, but

None of them, I think, were just like, how are we going to make the better rap trap to make more money?

It's just it was never.

So maybe there is a place where that kind of goal or mindset is more up to the front.

So I think there'll be a variety of inputs and outputs.

And yeah, JP, anything to add there?


SPEAKER_19:
Yeah, I mean, it reminds me of last year at the end of Complexity Weekend, or ComplexityCon, as we called it.

I had this idea for generating money, right?

It's like, I'm going to invent this one online app where you put your face in, and it gives you the average.

It averages your face, and it compares you to this giant database on the back end, and it compares you to other people with similar facial structures, and it gives you your expected name, right?

Yeah.

Like Facebook and like make a billion dollars and like, then I can fund this program.

So it's kind of cool like thinking about this, you know, the program as an entity, like how it wants to survive and like what it will invent to like fund itself, right?

So I was really motivated to get something like that together.


SPEAKER_28:
and also just to speak to that point about collective cognition or distributed cognition or diverse intelligences all these different things one thing that the digital context really forces us to confront is not just that people differ in their technological fluency or their familiarity but actually uh diverse intelligences in the digital context includes

artificial intelligences and potentially augmented intelligences.

So we could have a participant who's using a screen overlay that's instantly translating certain things that are being written.

Or they might be working with Google Translate to communicate.

And so it's like, yes, when you're in person, you hear about the love languages or the communication approaches you hear about.

I mean, the true range of cognitive diversity in humans.

And that's what the discussion has been about, because the spaces where that has flourished were in person.

And so less discussion of like, okay, phone lines, you know, how do we accommodate people with different talking structures or something like that?

But that was obviously important.

It just wasn't the focus of that field.

And now where you're interacting with people, it's like, is this a deep fake?

Is it a tech spot?

Is it 80% random tech spot?

And then 20% there's a person who just throws up new things that look like they're normal.

And so when we take real account of what the digital space opens up for collective cognition, you get things like Wikipedia and semantic networks.

You get all these real formal opportunities to have true collective cognition that's enabled by computers.

But even us just interacting with each other to some extent is also digitally augmented kind of cyborg like interactions.


SPEAKER_26:
Yeah, it's really interesting to think about the Internet, right?

Like just the way that the virtual space has connected us.

I mean, I know, Dan, your background is ants, right?

And so it's like the ant colony is like the super organism, right?

Like that itself, the colony functions like like an organism.

It's got a brain and a reproductive system and it's got like, you know, arms and legs and sensors and all this other stuff.

And it's interesting to think about humans having created this internet.

I think about it a lot of times.

It's this weird superorganism, right?

I don't know.

It's weird.

Powered by Google.

The brain is Google.

Some construct that's maybe Google plus...

Facebook plus, I don't know.

I mean, it's just, but there's these mega players, right?

In the internet world.

And it really is strange to be participating like that.

And I haven't really figured out where it's going or what it means.

It's kind of scares me sometimes when I really start to think about the super organism that we're creating.

Like we don't even know what we're doing, right?


SPEAKER_28:
Yeah, and it comes back to the earlier discussion.

JP, you're welcome to hop off any time.

It comes back to the earlier discussion about how collective cognition means that the subunits won't understand what the whole is up to.

Yeah.

in the internet, you know, everybody can see their Wikipedia account and what kinds of edits they're adding, but then how would we even assess what is being done collectively since the only way that we can interpret this is like within our own, you know, onboard cognition and how might things like ecological psychology or really highlighting the relationship between cognitive agents and their environment, how could we go so deep into the relational mindset

that we start to blur the boundary between individual and collective cognition.


SPEAKER_26:
you know it reminds me every year um there's a corn maze around here and i don't know if you've ever been through one of those or done one of those but like every year they give you a map right like and it shows you the structure of the corn maze and i mean every year they do something different like it's been you know the one one year it looks like a uh the mayan calendar and you know so it's always something like the pattern is that there's like a huge big pattern like where they go and design it and then they seed the corn accordingly

so if you were to get an aerial view of the corn maze it actually looks like you know the mayan calendar or or whatever they decide to do that year um and it's really

you know kind of scary thinking about like i'm a piece of corn in this big pattern and like i don't even know like i don't even know if the people that are making the maze like if they know what the pattern looks like yet like like they're just kind of working at it like kind of like that pixel where everybody made one pixel do you remember that like art it was like a collective online art project right like so if everybody's putting in one pixel you know there's like these wars and battles and you know factions trying to make it look like you know this color or that color or whatever and so

we just don't even know, we can't even see the big picture.

That's really scary to me sometimes.

And I wonder if there is some ultimate design or if someone somewhere, one of the big players has an agenda, right?

Like an online agenda or what that would even look like or what they're trying to create.

What's the ultimate space look like?


SPEAKER_28:
A lot to think about there.

One cliche that we haven't brought up is like seeing the forest and the trees or some variation.

And when you were talking about the cornfield, it's like, is there a complexity twist on see the forest and the trees, but it's not just macro and micro, you know, see the hidden root network that makes the forest arise from the trees, something like that.

And as to the digital component, it's so interesting.

It's like, it's happening fast.

And so people are in this sort of, I don't want to say a staged debate about return to a new normal, but in 2018, nobody was saying, are we going to go back to 2016?

In 2016, no one said it was going to be like 2014.

But for some reason in 2020, people ask about returning to the past.

And so when you just look at a five year kind of a smoothing average, smooth out over the noise locally.

And it's like at the decade level, the digital transformation is happening so fast that people who are just a few years younger than myself are in a totally different category of digital use.

So like I, you know, always had computers around, but not the disappearing text message category.

You know, it was like Facebook and MySpace, but not the Snapchat tier.

But only a few years shifted later, the sixth, seventh, eighth graders who are going through that same pipeline, it wasn't group text message threads.

It was like,

disappearing messages so the speed at which things are happening and then the fact that it seems to necessitate faster and faster um analysis more and more real time and then ultimately going up to the real time and then breaking through the moment and entering into predictive spaces where actually one is acting less about their now casting

and people are acting based upon a predictive insight.

On one hand, it's how organisms work.

It's why when you're tracking a baseball, you run to where the ball is going to go, not to where it is.

So the predictive mode is really where we can be the most integrative of our environment.

But at the same time, it just feels like it's this breakneck race that's just exhausting everyone and maybe even harming us in ways that we don't even know.


SPEAKER_26:
And one thing about the predictive mode is, you know, a lot of that is is coming through as information control, really.

Right.

Like so.

And I wonder, I mean, when we're talking about the grand design, right, like who's painting the picture or who's, you know, drawing the maze.

Right.

the information control is really coming through because it's like, oh, I predict since you bought this and this and this, I predict you will like this.

Or since you clicked this story and this story and this story, I predict you would like to see this story, right?

So there's this underlying prediction to where like my news is not your news.

you know and my shopping suggestions are not your shopping suggestions and nor should they be right like we probably don't need the same stuff like i don't wear the same size shoe as you you know i don't know if you want purple roller skates i've got some coming in the mail order another one order two that's right um but but it's it's really like um

you know, I would like to filter my own information, right?

And I know, like, I can go and I can Google purple roller skates, you know, I don't need an ad popping up and showing me purple roller skates.

And I would like to, you know, have news.

I mean, I've thought for a long time about, you know, news that's contributed just by like everyday people, right?

Like, you know, the courier that delivers coffee to the Oval Office or whatever, like, what news are you picking up on?

Like,

Who did you see there?

And how did the tone feel in the room?

You know, like just news from everyday people, not from, you know, big news companies or corporations or, you know, did you see an accident?

Like, I love the community watch like stuff that's going on and you can get real people that are involved in the situation and it's apolitical and it's, you know, real life things that are happening that aren't controlled or filtered through some information control center.


SPEAKER_28:
I would put that question about recommendation algorithms into an explore exploit framework.

So the explore would just be just things are presented.

The whole space of the possible is presented with very little bias or distortion or amplification of certain things.

And the exploit is more honing you in to maybe what you're already interested in.

And so it's a question of like a recommendation engine for somebody who likes musician A, should recommend them just musician A because it's what they like after all, or should it be a little bit of A, a little bit of adjacent to A, or maybe it's that people who like A, we're recommending them something to change your mind or to influence them in some other way.

And so it's like, it's just the beginning of such a detailed conversation about how the algorithms are distorting

people's behavior, but even the word distorting implies that there was some alternative undistorted set of actions.

You know, Google is reporting to you a list of results.

There simply isn't an unbiased way to report the results.

There's just no way that you can type in a word and just say, Oh yeah, well that, of course that was the first one.

It's always based upon some sort of a rubric or a heuristic.

What do you think about that?


SPEAKER_26:
No.

So like, okay, listen, here's the thing.

Like you've searched PubMed, I assume, right?

In my day.

In your day.

Okay.

So you got to do a PubMed search.

I really don't think that like my PubMed is different from your PubMed.


SPEAKER_28:
I agree.

Just to respond to that.

I totally agree because it's a very constrained database and you can sort by date.

So I agree when you're doing category specific search and it's exhaustive and everybody's looking at the same input, same output.

I agree.

And then there's this nebulous space with the buying and the music and everything.

But go on.


SPEAKER_26:
Right, right.

Well, so I mean, like the music is kind of different.

Like I like my predictive music.

I like like, you know, Pandora, like I, you know, set a seed and just push go.

It exposes me to new things that I maybe didn't wouldn't hear otherwise.

You know, I enjoy that type of thing.

But I think like in a Google search.

I mean, it's weird because the Internet space has grown so big.

Right.

And like, you know, PubMed and search, it says sort by relevance.

And so it kind of goes in and decides how relevant, you know, a paper is for you or not.

Right.

But I think that relevance, there's like a fundamental, like skeletal algorithm that just says, how many times did this word pop up or like your keywords?

How many times are your two keywords in that one paper?

And I think that that's how they do their relevance or something similar to that.

But the Google stuff, I guess, if I wanted it to be like, search COVID-19, if I wanted to have the website that was the most relevant for COVID-19, I would just hit repeat, put COVID-19 100 million times on my website and that's the most relevant and then show a picture of whatever, some dumb picture of my advertisement for my business or something like that.

So I don't know, it's a tricky thing, but I don't know that it should necessarily be personalized, right?

Like I wish that there was some, like I love using Tor Browser and DuckDuckGo and because I feel like that those are, you know, not tracking me, right?


SPEAKER_28:
I think it really recalls one of Zargum's earlier points, which is all models are wrong, some are useful.

People usually end the sentence there, but useful is within a framework of who's useful and to what ends.

And so similarly, the date search on PubMed, I was going to say the sort by date is unambiguous, but then I think journals will say that a paper is published like nine months in the future.

so that it can pre-accumulate citations.

So sorting by date, it's like the date it was a preprint or the date at which it was officially published.

And then the relevance, if they just said, we sorted it by the number of mentions or by the word co-occurrence or something, there wouldn't be any discussion.

But when we simplify and we say, oh, principal component one, that's a general intelligence.

OK, maybe.

But it's principal component one.

That's an empirical statement.

And so whatever the relevance filter is doing on PubMed, maybe it brings some resolution to a signal-to-noise problem or helps people search.

But relevance is always going to be about what is relevant for.

So for somebody looking up topic A, a keyword is going to be relevant or not.

It's interesting how often these digital systems will just appeal to a word, democracy or relevance or popularity, and then all the details and all of the manipulation can be hidden under the hood just by saying, but we sorted by the top trending tracks.

How can you disagree that these are the trending keywords on Twitter?

It's like, what does that really mean?

Hello, Monica.

Welcome back.


SPEAKER_25:
Hello.

Hi, Monica.


SPEAKER_28:
Good.

How is it with the teams?

What have you been hearing or seeing or thinking about?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, so I just stopped by some of the mingling.

Great to see so many folks.

It was already great to hear some folks like, where is all the other people?

I want to see more people.

And it was some folks were saying, hey, we were just wrapping up in the meeting.

We didn't know this was happening.

We wish we knew it earlier so that we can meet other folks.

as well as some folks kind of connecting and i just checked in with all the team leads so thank you for those who responded back i'm waiting to hear back from some but it's great to hear many of them right now knowing that we are a few hours away from the final presentation uh they were trying to make up for that deadline to be mindful and so they were like we're busy working on our pitch or we're putting together the deck now

or practicing um and so uh i'm i'm glad to hear and you know it's it's always a bit of a marathon in the last few hours and so i just can't wait to see what they share and what they've been working on and just see what kind of collaboration that has emerged so yeah


SPEAKER_28:
Cool.

Anything else that you're thinking about, Blue?

If you want to talk more, please stay on.

Otherwise, thanks so much for hanging out.


SPEAKER_26:
Yeah, yeah.

It's been fun holding up the live stream.

I'll let you guys talk about it and get on about my workday so that I can come back and participate in the end of the day presentations because I'm anxious to see also what the teams are putting out there.

Perfect.


SPEAKER_25:
See you later.

Bye.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_28:
Nice, Monica.

Great to have you back.

And it's really good to see, again, when we see little activity in I Need a Team, I see people just leaving the I Need a Team sub-channel one after another and posted quite a while ago, since 9 AM, is anyone looking to start a team or join a team?

No responses.

Perfect.

you know, if everyone knows where they can go.

And even if you're watching this in repeat or in, you know, whatever after the fact, you know, come back to, I need a team.

And in three months when you need a team, there's going to be people who are still tracking this channel.


SPEAKER_02:
So that reminds me, that leads to a great question.

I mean, so after this event, because I assume everything is still gonna be available.

People can still go back here to connect.

They can still watch these videos again whenever they want a refresher.

Is there anything else that they should be thinking about or is that too early to ask already?


SPEAKER_28:
Well, I think that the guiding principle in moving forward beyond this weekend is just a culture of co-creation and a community where everyone's perspective is brought into the fold and where we're bringing the yes and and the identity together by forming these project oriented groups.

So I would say there's the technological aspects of moving forward, which is you're linked up

on a Keybase team with people who you can even search for their name.

You can see everything that somebody has posted in chat.

So if you need to refresh on what somebody's background is, you could go to introductions.

If you have something that you need to add, you can just put it in another channel.

On the technological end, I think that the fact that people are already pre-linked up will make this a lot easier than the scramble to create like a WhatsApp group at the last moment.

And then culturally, we're really just looking forward to seeing how we move forward.

How are we going to keep this intensity, but just dilute it over a longer time period and saying, okay, phase two is after Sunday at 4 p.m.

Phase two is when we actually do it.

And so it's good to be excited.

It's necessary, but it's definitely not sufficient.

And then the necessity moves from it.

It's a necessity that the organizers make clear statements about where things are going to be held and where we succeeded.

We hope we succeeded where we feel we're going to learn and improve.

And then the next level of necessity is about the community just stepping in for each other.


SPEAKER_02:
No, thank you for sharing that, because I think where everyone is, I mean, even for me, I'm like, oh, wow, there's so much richness and thoughtfulness throughout this whole experience.

Like, it will be bummed, again, going back to the conversation we had earlier in the group conversation.

It's like, what, you know, how do you make sure you bring it back to where you are?

And I think that's so important for people to think about whether it

The whole weekend context and how you continue to build your ideas, work with teams, but also making sure how you're pacing yourself and integrating this into your life.

And I think that kind of question of how do you make sure everything you continue to experience, whether it's the complexity weekend or anything else, the next few weeks and months, because where things are.

I think it's so critical to have that mindset of how do I bring it back to where I am?

How do I continue to build on that instead of like, that's a done and I'm gone thing.

And so one thing I am curious actually, because if I understand correctly, this is not the first time you guys are hosting this.

I understand this is the first time you're probably organizing us all together online, which as you have acknowledged is opening up the doors to many more people.

I was in the mingling group and we just met somebody who was like, I'm calling in from Thailand and like,

I would have never been able to attend this unless it was like available like this virtually, which is super exciting.

But as somebody who's hosted this before in person, as I assume so, what are some things that you noticed that has changed and has remained perhaps from what you've done before?


SPEAKER_28:
Great question.

So last year, we organized our first Complexity Weekend in San Francisco in person on Market Street.

And I think several of the key differences relate to me to that accessibility retention trade-off where if everybody has to

go into the pit to enter, then they're not going out.

But when we make it easy to come, it also means that it's easy to leave.

And so that's one fundamental trade-off.

Another fundamental trade-off I think is related to attention and about fragmentation of attention.

And so everybody knows the one and only attention source to be in.

It's either a live stream or it's like everybody in a 200 person Jitsi room where there's not that much chance for any individual to speak.

And so that all eyes on something, all eyes on the YouTube or all eyes on the Jitsi, it doesn't allow a chorus of voices to be participating.

It's really one person participating at a time.

So it's not really taking advantage of the format.

Then you say, well, fine, let's fragment.

Let's have the YouTube but we'll have in general is where we'll have the chat or within the chat, why don't we split it up into different explore?

Or if you have a cool idea, why don't you jump into the Jitsi?

As fragmentation happens,

More and more innovation can occur in these sort of tips in the tide pools where there's small groups that are coming together or focused discussions.

So on one hand, there's more replication across chat rooms or video conferencing rooms.

So more people are speaking at once fundamentally.

And that can be an awesome thing.

And the hard thing is in a digital space, as compared to the physical, we can't just ring a bell and say, OK, clap me once if you hear, clap me twice if you hear.

We did that last year.

And there'd be people in the mixer and we'd say, OK, come back, come back, come back.

And we'd physically be able to take them, say, yeah, OK, OK, come back in.

And we can't do that digitally.

And so having a general channel is a great sort of collecting ground.

But in the end, even if I posted 20 times, we're live at this live stream.

How would somebody know to be looking at the right place at the right time?

And so it really is going to be part of our forensics, part of our post-conference decompression, and also a true opening to anybody who wants to participate or help us in any way, whether they were a facilitator this year or a participant.

everybody is part of the community and so however people can contribute either through a suggestion or a question or by volunteering their time however people could speak to these issues about the retention accessibility and inclusion component of our conference to the attention and logistics and live streaming is on

So whoever can step in to any of those roles, if that feels like something natural for the person to contribute to, then it's perfect.


SPEAKER_02:
I love the emphasis on co-creation because actually even for me, even before COVID-19, one thing I was observing at conferences or organizing or even things that we were putting together was just the emphasis on like,

Guys, people are tired of being lectured.

People are tired of traditional Q&A.

People want to really experience.

People want interaction.

And there has to be more than one option.

But in traditional conferencing, while the in-person is very powerful, and I do miss it, I can't wait to get back to it when we can, there is power to, even whether it's in-person or virtual, to kind of keep co-creating these spaces where multiple people can interact

be at the right place at the right time and i want to kind of go back to one of the statements that you shared which i thought was really insightful and you know a really good question to think about is just people feel like what am i spending the right time at the right place and i think that's something that we always feel whether we're out of it whether we're at school for students whether we are living through life um and i think sometimes that in itself

is something that a skill right both from the host side but also as a participant side like how do i not have fomo there's like bazillion things that is happening at the same time they could be watching the live stream now they can be in a group conversation with their teams finishing up their presentation they can be just connecting with somebody new for the first time and they're having a jam or they might be you know chatting with somebody else through keybase uh and you know having a connection and

That's so great and I think you know one of the things I loved I forget where I got if I think it must have been from either the art of gathering which is a great book that talks about how do you bring more meaningful experience together or other research it talks about

whether you're coming organizing a space as a host or coming as a participant, the right place at the right time is always now the person that you're and the person that you're talking to at each time.

And I think when we each person takes a moment to think about being more present at each moment, then there's less FOMO, then there's less of a distraction.

of like, if they are at live stream at the moment, that is where you are now.

If you feel like, oh, okay, five minutes, that's enough.

I need to go back to my team and do that.

That's where you gotta be.

And I think in a way, what I'm excited to hear is based on your past experience and what I hope this experience bring is that

are we going to see even more exciting type of complex event type structures?

Like where we will not have the in-person and the digital component, and we're going to have even like six conversations going on at the same time.

And people will ask that question, where do I spend my right time?

And as they navigate that, that in itself is a journey, which is the key word that I know you all have been talking for the whole weekend.


SPEAKER_28:
What it makes me think about is very large events like Society for Neuroscience, which famously has like a 50,000 person neuroscience conference in person.

I don't know what they're doing this year.

Or events like music festivals or any other kind of really focused multi-day event where there's

dozens or even hundreds of concurrent sessions poster sessions talks workshops or you could just go hang out and network so there's a hundred things and then people just go oh right there's only one of me there's only one body only one set of eyes so of course i'm going to be in session four and i'm not in session three but i'll ask someone about it later but the twist with the digital spaces is it's like

they're all right here.

They're all on my computer.

So there's this feeling like I need to be like jumping in and out of them.

But imagine if someone said, well, I'm going to jump in and out of session three and four.

You'd say, you know what, the switching, just the cognitive burden of switching is probably going to be too high.

And just speak with someone about session three, but

fully be in four and then talk to somebody who was really in three.

And then you'll both be able to get something that's larger than splitting your time.

And with digital media, there's a illusion that the switching costs are low.

that simply just popping into a Jitsi and figuring out what's happening while there's a live stream that's muted and there's texts that are pinging you in the background, the switching costs and the cognitive burden, the cognitive complexity can be extreme.

And so there's a feeling or because the activation is so low to make the switch, you don't have to get up in the middle of the lecture and awkwardly run out.

The switching costs appear low,

But the real cost is your attention and your comprehension.

And that is what is not so easily switched when you rejoin a new Jitsi and it takes 30 seconds just even catch up with what is being said because you jumped in in the middle of a paragraph.

That's 30 seconds where, yeah, you were there like you showed face, but you actually weren't being a focal member.

And so then if you use that 30 seconds as an on ramp for an hour,

then the 30 seconds was worth it.

But if you do the 30 seconds and then you reevaluate that you should just check Keybase while this person is finishing up something, now you're not doing either.

And so how we create really accessible cyber-physical events, because all events are cyber-physical, the conferences, the people are checking their phone,

And in this version of online, it's also physical.

It's really about the people at their computers or wherever they are.

So how we explore the space of cyber physical teams and cyber physical events and trading off short focused events with long term collaborations or text, it's like the space is open.

We climbed a big hill to 2020 and now it's the time to understand what the next steps are for this.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

And to add to that, you know, immediately things that I just jotted down is that it takes time for the brain to process.

And even for me, I think when I wake up in the morning, I am one of the guilty ones.

I do sleep close to my phone, which I need a fix.

But like, I'm so I'm guilty.

I watch movies before I go to bed and then I wake up.

I'm like, wait, I just want to make sure I don't miss anything.

But one of the things I have noticed is that I try to be mindful.

even though I have tempted and still made the mistake, but I try to make sure even if I read things or like look up on things, how do I make sure I'm not responding to things?

Because I'm still like, my brain is still waking up and I might be more in a gut reaction instead of really processing what this message is.

And sometimes that might be making sure I don't write an upsetting email.

Sometimes it might be that I'm not processing in a,

an indirect way and i say that it's the context of what you were sharing and just about how it feels when we're an event jumping in and out because at times we're not actually even able to have our brain pause and process i think another way that i like to think about is music

There's a reason why there is a gap in between the music.

There's a beat, right?

If there was no pause, it will be a complete noise and chaos.

And that's not really music.

And I think we need to give our brain a bit of a space and pause.

And so even for me as a result, and even if I read things other than not responding, I try to make sure I pause.

and take time to just process or even just have a time period for like 30 minutes where I'm not listening to anything, not no sound, just like the windows open.

So I somehow hear the birds a lot more.

I don't know if anyone else is noticing like that.

You just hear nature significantly more.

But when you do that, even if it's for five minutes, you just let your brain to kind of process through.

And I think we forget that in our rush of wanting to do everything immediately,

we don't make space to do deep thinking and i know multitasking has been something that we pride upon in society but really to do multitasking very well actually means you're doing one thing at a time very well at a faster pace at least that's what i feel because i love multitasking and i feel like dan i've been seeing how you're multitasking through the weekend but for you to actually share that it's not you being in 10 spaces it's actually you being at 10 different spaces at a fast pace

just one place at a time though um and i think that i hope is one of the beauty that folks are feeling and i loved your advice as well and that hey if there's two sessions it's not that you have to go to both divide your team and i think that's hopefully a beautiful reminder for teams right now as they're continuing to work together they have a team ask somebody who's like hey can you jump into that group can you go find out what that other team is doing can you go research that and divide up the team effort because it doesn't have to be all just one person um

So I hope not just people walk away from this experience, not just about complexity or like that was a fun weekend.

But as you have acknowledged, there's all these different layers of things that we can walk away and think about and build upon.

So.


SPEAKER_28:
It reminds me of the Eisenhower, the two by two urgent versus not urgent and then important versus not important.

It's kind of a classic two by two and digital communications run the gamut from truly important, like really a life-changing email that if you don't respond to, you're not gonna get a job or something like that to just worse than unimportant spam as we call it or other, you know, more derogatory terms.

But the problem is when we get a notification, it biases us to think that things are more urgent than they really are.

And so I don't know if the answer is some sort of user interface that allows multiple different types of notifications to be filtered through.

It leads basically to one of two modes.

Either as soon as I see one missed chat in Keybase, I'm like, I'd rather just click on the thread just so it's not orange.

But it's not important.

I'm not even going to read it.

I just don't want to see a notification.

That's one mode.

And then the other one would be, I'm really focused on responding to this message or participating in this group.

Even looking at what the notification is, is going to take me out of this state.

Even having this thought is taking me out of a true concentration state.

And so those two cognitive extremes from just switching so rapidly that I'm basically just making my windows and my to-do list cleaner, but not actually making progress on research to the other end where it's like, okay, cool.

I muted everything, but now I don't even know which websites to check for notifications because I just closed everything.

Somewhere in between, which is as we've been talking about, that's where all the complexity is.

Then we're in the space where we can talk with the interface design people and with the incentive design, how are we going to make these systems work?

How can we work with the systems that we have access to here

so that the kinds of events that we end up producing are able to include people from time zones and backgrounds and perspectives, yes, but also different styles for digital communication.

So that's actually a perfect note for the Epicenter to enter on.

Welcome.

Good to see you both.

Just a starting question, just to sort of transition from this discussion about technology to your answer and anything else, please take it away.

How can we make sure that from the whole spectrum of familiarity with digital technologies, how do we make sure that the events that we're planning are able to be accessible to all kinds of communication styles, digital platforms, et cetera?


SPEAKER_12:
Yeah.

Do you have any thoughts around it?

i mean i would say actually that's one of the questions not just about the technology uh based platforms but uh that's a question that we have i mean we have put together a series of questions that we thought are important to ask and one question was about inclusivity you know because most people uh the moment you talk about some making something inclusive inclusive

The first question that comes is the question of access, right?

But you might also see that a lot of things are accessible but not engaging.

And in our opinion, if you can just have access to something but you can't engage with it, which means that you're not going to be retained in that process, right?

It's not inclusive enough.

So I think one of the things that we were both discussing a while ago when we were putting together these questions is that

In all of the discussions that we are having, there is a lot of discussions around what we think, what is needed, what experts are saying.

But at the end of the day, we are designing something for people.

What do the people want?

Do they want it in the first place?

Is it a top-down kind of a thing?

So I think the moment we bring in a people aspect and a culture aspect to it, I think things become more contextual.

Because something that we were trying to argue

even the other day, was that although COVID-19 is a great equalizer in the way that the whole world is somewhere or the other impacted by it, but not everybody is impacted the same way.

Even within one country, not everybody is affected the same way, right?

So I think, I mean, this is not just about the complexity we can, but both of us have been called for several...

different kinds of consultation.

I mean, one of the things was quite interesting where people were thinking about designing virtual courts, for example.

And we were in the middle of these groups of lawyers and judges and supreme judges and all of that.

And the question was, one is the technology enablement of a service, but the other thing was about the acceptance.

Because every single thing that we experience, we can take over the experience part of it and say that technology is the solution.

So technology is one of the enablers in the solutioning.

But the moment we start talking about technology as the solution, it creates a blanket statement.

And that becomes problematic, is what we feel.

And that becomes exclusive.


SPEAKER_28:
It's such a great point.

And just the note I wrote down from that is inclusion is not about inclusive consumption.

It's about inclusive participation.

It's not just like, oh, well, this app is installed on a desktop and a phone so everyone can watch.

It's like that's the wrong problem.

The problem wasn't that they couldn't get the content delivered.

The problem was the other direction.

And so I completely hear that.

Monica, any other thoughts on that inclusive participation angle and then how tech as a barrier could be reduced, not proposed as a solution?


SPEAKER_02:
No, absolutely.

And thank you for highlighting that.

I think one thing that's been really enriching to think about is, yes,

This is a very difficult time for all of us in a different way in different places.

But one thing that it has really emerged is making it clear where things are broken, where things need improvements, where things are, you know, there's missing gaps.

And I think, you know, going back to both, you know, all three of both of your points is just seeing where.

Now we know for sure if somebody didn't use something or if somebody was not showing up, it's not because they were late or lazy, it's because of something else.

There's a root greater problem in inequality.

And I hope, I really hope all the creators out there, especially the engineers, the tech folks, the software developers, because I think we're gonna be relying on a lot of those more solutions as we navigate this time that they are indeed

inclusive and thinking about those diverse demographics and you know whether it's thinking about hey like we just know people they don't want to download a software because they don't have any more room in their computer so it's going to be accessible on the internet but hey it would still work if they have slow internet what if they all they have is just a smartphone

Or how would education work when you have two kids, but you only have one computer?

And that's, for instance, like a problem I'm hearing from across all parents right now and friends who are saying like, we didn't realize if we needed to get now more tech, even like laptops.

The optimistic part of me is that I hope the right people in the right place are going to utilize these knowledge and information and data points to think about, wow, this is what we've done right.

This is where we've done wrong.

How can we learn from this experience and improve upon?

build things where there are missing gaps, wherever they are.

And it's been exciting, I believe, even with online meets and a lot of these tools, like it kind of organically came out.

And so I hope others who are watching and thinking about this, you don't have to wait until you're like, you know, a billionaire or a big company.

You might be able to build a small project or have a solution that is immediately accessible, even maybe for a group of friends who just have a very different time, maybe for frontline workers.

And so

I hope one of the things that people think about is it's not  we can all be creators.

We are all stakeholders at the same time, and there's always another audience that we might not know.

So that's why you always want to spend your time with diverse audiences because we're not able to see the entire world unless we meet another person.

And then through that, if you are creating anything, just 

Let's use this opportunity to learn about where it's broken so that we improve upon.

Because I really hope by post-COVID-19, we say less of like, hey, we missed out on this whole population because we continue to build it a stereotypical way.

We're assuming one avatar.


SPEAKER_12:
I think something that you're talking about is that the whole point of interactions and emergence, which is such an important part of complexity,

is something that people talk about, but they don't actually engage in that.

So if you don't look at what is emerging, you are only looking at what you thought had emerged in the past, not what's right there in front of you.

And I think what, at least in my own little practice, I would say that if you can't observe, you can't really use complexity anywhere.

Because only when you observe,

that you start seeing the patterns and you start understanding the relationships.

And the problem is that when, again, we talk about observation, it is always about observing the other.

But what about observing myself?

I'm a part of a bigger whole.

And I need to understand my own interactions with the larger systems and the smaller systems.

And I think, again, we talk about complexity and systems.

But the whole idea of the adaptive system kind of takes a backseat.

So we don't spend enough time in understanding where is the adaptiveness coming from.

So yeah, I think.

Those are important questions because I mean, I think both of us keep on talking about it all the time about this whole thing about technology, as if anything that you talk about, you say, Oh, technology is the solution.

I mean, technology is not one thing, right?

Like you can't say complexity is the solution.

It's so it's an approach to make sense of things.

So technology likewise is a tool or a, or, or an enabler.

You can use it as a catalyst, but.

it might be a hindrance to so many things as well.

So not used wisely, it's actually a bigger problem than a solution, I feel.


SPEAKER_02:
And to add to that, you know, I hope folks think about from this weekend experience and, you know, throughout their continuing weeks and months and years ahead, think about how they continue to integrate it.

And I think one piece of kind of

advice that I would love to share, if I may, is that my mentor shared it with me when I was thinking about how do I make sure I'm intentionally spending time with people who think differently so that I continue to not stay narrow and in my own zone so that I can be thoughtful and inclusive throughout this.

And the advice was that, you know, this was originally thinking into the context of the type of mentor you can have.

But I think it relates to the type of people you can surround yourself, which I hope is helpful for everyone.

Find people who think and look like you.

Find people who think and don't look like you.

Find people who don't think but look like you.

Find people who don't think and don't look like you.

And I think that's so important because in truth, we stop at the first category.

It's like, oh my gosh, you are like my group.

I connect with you.

I dive with you.

We totally get it.

Finish my sentence.

That's exciting.

And you should absolutely have those people.

But I think when we only spend time with people that we feel like that way and not open to all these other group of friends who are in the same person as well, we kind of forget.

And so hopefully that simple way is a reminder.

Right now, think about the five people you spend your time most with.

where are they in that category and if they are in one bucket you might want to think about how you diversify that so that's that's one thing i want to just add an actionable thing you can do regardless of your creator and where you are that that's really powerful you know yeah yeah and i think it's very relevant in the world today uh be it in the us be it in india because uh we've all you know made our boxes and we uh


SPEAKER_06:
are always afraid of the other boxes around us.

And this is so important.

Thanks for making that point, Monika.


SPEAKER_21:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_12:
Yeah.

Absolutely.


SPEAKER_28:
What is the next question or thought that you had?

And explain it in however much depth to lead into the question.


SPEAKER_12:
Sure.

Sure.

If you don't mind, we want to share our screen.


SPEAKER_06:
So we have quickly put a deck together.

It's not very well formatted because we didn't have the time.

it makes the point, I guess.

So we'll just go ahead and share the screen.


SPEAKER_12:
Sounds good.


SPEAKER_28:
You can see our screen, right?

I can see your screen.

And then if you click the little camera, you can enable your picture in picture as well.

But it looks great.


SPEAKER_12:
OK, I will try to see.


SPEAKER_06:
Sorry, one second.


SPEAKER_12:
No, you will need to move it, I think.


SPEAKER_21:
No, we are on the PDF.


SPEAKER_12:
Yeah, we are on the PDF here.

So you can see us now?

Looks great.


SPEAKER_28:
Continue.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_12:
Okay.


SPEAKER_28:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_12:
All right.

We'll just make it full screen and just share.

So we were thinking that, you know,

all the things that we are all trying to engage in, in the last few days, it somewhere boils down to the ability to ask difficult questions.

And the difficulty is not about asking the other.

The most difficult question is the one that you can ask yourself, you know, something which is genuinely authentic, something that makes you a little uncomfortable at times.

But if you can frame those difficult questions, it helps in reframing and

the way in which we look at things.

And I think that's something that we thought is really important.

So these are thoughts that we both were discussing that were popping up in the last two days and even today when we were engaging in some of the groups as they were discussing.

Are we just, I mean, so we have put it in a way in which these are questions that people can ask.

Not all the questions are relevant for everybody, but we felt that this is like a series of many different questions, which might be pertinent and not just for the complexity we can, but whenever we are trying to, uh, walk towards solutions, maybe these are important things that we can think about.

So one is, are we just thinking, or are we just doing because, um, you know,

You will find some people when they come together through a process of innovation, or they think that they're walking towards solutioning.

They're just thinking, thinking, thinking.

There are some people who, who never ended up doing anything.

It's just about thinking.

And then on the other hand, you have people who are just doing, doing, doing that, just jumping into doing without any criticality in it.

So I think somewhere the balance needs to be brought in.

And, uh, you know, a lot of people in the world of education across the globe talks about how.

Earlier, education used to be defined by the three R, reading, writing, and arithmetic, and stuff like that.

These days, they say that the three R's are replaced by the three H, head, hand, and heart.

And I think that's true for any process.

If we just keep using our hand without the head and the heart, it'll just be making for the sake of making.

It doesn't make any sense.

On the other hand, if you just keep using our head without the heart and the hand,

then it'll just stay at the realm of something very cerebral, something very cognitive, but it will not be relevant to other people.

And if you have both the head and the hand, and then there is no heart to it, then the whole aspect of making something which is human, that kind of gets lost.

And I think that's one of the first and the last question that people should ask, absolutely.

The next one is,

Are we only thinking about the outcome and hence not focusing on the process?

Because some people, again, they just look into the outcome.

I mean, by the end of this hackathon, I have to have a solution which might look good.

There has to be a very defined solution.

So are we just looking at that?

And then the process kind of gets lost.

You don't engage in a process which is immersive, which is important.

On the other hand, there are people you will see that for them, this is a pertinent question.

Are we still talking about our ideas and have not even started thinking what we want to do?

And more importantly, why will that be relevant?

So it's a lot of theory, you know, like talking and talking and more talking, and then it sort of becomes an exercise, an intellectual exercise where it becomes an ego booster.

How much I know, how many papers have I read?

How many references can I cite?

And then in that process of trying to show or perform,

you stop forgetting that you need to somewhere start.

So the starting point is never reached.

And I think that's really important.

And even when we start, it's not about how many scholars have talked about it.

We still need to contextualize it and ask the question, is it relevant?

Is it relatable?

Because even if something is relevant and you understand and I understand, it doesn't matter if the user for whom

you're looking at the solution, they can relate to it.

There's going to be an outright rejection of it.

Similarly, is the solution or is the problem stated even important to the potential user?

Also, most importantly, on a similar note, if it's important but it doesn't interest any of us, they will not accept it or it will not last.

The sustainability of the solution lies in

first asking these four questions.

And once these four things are sort of taken care of, you at least know that you're walking towards something which is people-centered, which is user-centered, right?


SPEAKER_06:
Yes.

So our next set of questions, again, is about what are we seeing?

And why are we seeing that?

What is it that we are not seeing?

And I guess

This is the point that Monica was also making.

Where is our bias?

Biases can exist in everything that we do, including going through an innovation process.

So what are we claiming as a problem?

Is that really a problem?

Or our solution might be a part of the problem itself?

So this is something that we keep working on, framing the problem right.

And whenever we go through, be it

in an organization, be it in a university or a school, whatever problems people come to us with, I think the framing is the biggest part of the journey itself.

Though a lot of times we'd be asked about if we spend so much time in framing the problem, will we have time for the rest of the process?

And we always go back and say that it is worth your while because

In the language of design, we have a term called wicked problems where primarily a problem that you keep on investing a lot of resources in, but you cannot solve.

It's ill-defined.

It's ill-defined.

This problem framing or problem definition phase is very important for any innovation process.

I think for us to introspect and for the team to reflect upon what they

think is the problem statement is very important.

That's very important to see whether we are looking at it through our biases or we are seeing things as they are.

Similarly, are we doing something that we want to or is there a need?

Who defined the need?

For any Shark Tank fan like I am, you would see this is the first question that they'd always ask you, is there a need?

Even for academics, is there a need that they're trying to, to the point that Sudebi was making on the previous slide, are we indulging in an intellectual discourse for ourselves?

Is this an egocentric worldview that I have and am I doing this because I want my ward to get out there or am I doing it for the greater good?

Like we spoke about in our first presentation,

uh, Friday, uh, is it, is it about being egocentric or is it about being egocentric?

And am I looking at the ecosystem and I'm looking at the ecosystem of this entire hackathon or the innovation process that I'm a part of and trying to address the need as it exists.


SPEAKER_12:
Yeah.

And we therefore feel that like Monica was saying, and our Daniel, you were also talking about earlier that unless and until we look at a problem from multiple perspectives through many lenses,

The framing can never happen because then it's a framing in the name of problem statement.

We are just stating our own assumptions about the problem.

Right.

Then comes to the point in connection with what we were seeing.

Are we driven by how popular our idea is or how cool it sounds?

Are we egocentric enough to not care about what other things about our ideas, right?

So these are two extremes.

Some people are only guided by what, where is the, you know, like, are they getting a validation from someone else or somewhere else, right?

So then that drive is towards what others think, what others feel, how others accept it.

And the other end of that spectrum is where you just don't care at all about whether people

like it or not, whether they need it or not.

But it is more like, I think this idea is really great.

And the two ends of this binary can probably be dissolved if we question what values are we guided by, what are the values which are shaping.

And when you're working in collaboration, it's extremely important to understand which values are in alignment with each other.

Because if there is a value mismatch in the team,

uh it really sort of falls apart after a point and so um in a lot of um teams we would see that at the end of the day when we are trying to bring out some kind of solution the modality of the solution needs to be laid out right um so the how has to be talked about now the question is the how

is okay.

I mean, there can be multiple modalities or multiple media or multiple ways in which the roadmaps can be charted out.

But the question is, are our ideas guided by the what or the why?

Because if the idea is guided by a what and there's no why in it, this is again going to go in a vicious cycle and it doesn't work out.

And then your how is then completely shaped by the what and not the why.

But on the other hand, if our starting point becomes the why of it, then we are going to start looking through the how in order to arrive at the what, right?

So that's something that we think is very important while looking at going from a problem to how the problem can be addressed.

And when we are talking about future, so this is a very important part which earlier also we were speaking about in response to Monica, that when we are talking about future, because say when we talk about COVID-19, it's almost a situation where our future has arrived.

I mean, all the things that people were talking about, you know, a turbulent future, you know, an unpredictable, a novel, an ambiguous future or a

you know, a volatile, complex future, that future is no more future.

It has become the present, right?

Now, interestingly, we are talking about future.

We are talking about solutions in the future and especially in a peculiar situation where we don't know so many things, right?

But then we are allowing ourselves to be guided not by the future, which is uncertain and complex.

We are letting our past dictate or shape what we see, what we think and what we believe.

And at the end of the day, we need to understand that it's our beliefs, it's our thought processes, it's the way in which we see things.

Those are the things that sort of directly guide our actions.

We can't just say that, oh, this is someone's behavior or this is someone's action.

Behavior and action have got a direct connection with how we see, think, believe, and feel, right?

So that's really, really important to look at.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah.

Going back to the questions about need and whether we're doing it to serve our own purposes or a customer slash an user, are we reinventing the wheel?

Is there any need?

Are we too generic or are we too specific?

What do we bank on for our source of knowledge?

Have we spoken to stakeholders or our sources?

spoken could be anything.

Have we gotten in touch with the stakeholders?

Is there any kind of research that I've engaged with on a one-on-one basis?

Especially with a subject like COVID, which is all around us now, there are so many people we can speak to, we can listen to, there are so many sources of information already available which we can tap into.

Are we doing that or are we primarily looking at

whether it's our academic papers or whether it is scientific research that we have available to hand.

Primarily, is there any primary research that we're doing before we're taking this problem on?


SPEAKER_12:
In fact, I'd like to mention here about something interesting.

It's not interesting at a personal level because as you know that both of us are from India and we are based out of a place called Bangalore.

And many of our relatives, including our parents, are based out of a place called Calcutta, which is in the state of West Bengal.

And West Bengal, Odisha, and these two places in India, and of course, Bangladesh, these are affected currently by the super cyclone.

I mean, we don't know how to pronounce it correctly because some people call it Amphan.

Some people are calling it Umpun.

But anyways, the fact of the matter is West Bengal as a state,

Um, where our parents are and our friends and family members are, um, COVID-19 is on the rise, right?

Every single day, uh, you will hear the news of.

This is the highest spike in a day.

So every day is the highest.

So you can imagine how it's increasing, right?

And it comes with its own complexity, right?

Because, uh, the moment you have less and numbers, people will talk about less number of testing happening.

Uh, the moment you have higher numbers.

then there are other kinds of things.

I mean, do you need to do a lockdown?

Do you need to do a lockdown in a certain way?

Do you, you know, try and look for herd immunity?

Do you look for a Western model or do you look at someone else?

You know, I mean, COVID-19 is such a complex kind of a thing, right?

And even when we talk about examples, I mean, good examples, you know, you don't know what to draw upon because even the sources of knowledge

talks a lot about the kind of inherent bias we have, the hierarchies and the power games that we have, right?

Because, for example, you will constantly hear about, and please don't get us wrong, we are not against or for any country, we're just telling you what happens, that on popular media, you will probably hear a lot about European countries, right?

Like, say, Germany, or you might hear about New Zealand and

You are constantly talking about these as examples.

But then nobody will ever talk about, say, Vietnam.

You won't hear.

I mean, the other day we were reading about Mongolia and how they're addressing it.

And then this whole debate and assumption that, oh, Mongolia is not even a country to be considered because what is the population density?

And then the article actually broke the myth about population density and all of that.

brought in a comparison with the place in Italy where the manifestation of the pandemic was so much more, and they're not widely different.

So why we're talking about it is that within COVID-19 itself, there is so much complexity, so many things to consider.

You don't know what works and what doesn't work.

has another layer of complexity in many countries, and definitely in India, which is the complexity of the migrant workers.

Because within India, we have people from one state moving into another state where they all migrate because of work, right?

And then you see these

heartbreaking images of exodus which are happening, right?

And there is this whole complexity around it.

You cannot just talk about it in terms of only economic things because the problem is not just economic.

The problem is not just ecological.

The problem is so much more than that, right?

So these two where, for example, when the migrant workers from this Bengal were coming back, that itself is an issue, whether to take them back or whether to

Not take them back, right?

To top it, top that, you have the cyclone.

And there are people who have been without water and without electricity in the capital of West Bengal, which is Calcutta, for more than 72 hours, right?

Now, what do you do in this kind of a situation?

Why we are seeing this is that if you just look at literature available about how to cope up with COVID at an economic level, that doesn't hold good when you also consider the complexity that a cyclone kind of brings in.

If you have to stay, say, in a refugee camp, what kind of social distancing are you even talking about?

Does it even work over there?

So one is connected to another.

It's almost like you are...

you know the problem is coming from so many levels you probably can't even frame the problem you are in that kind of a situation so at least to have the humility to recognize that the fallacy of looking at the problem from one end is that you are looking at it only from one example which

which is out there in a different context.

And you cannot just draw upon that and say, well, this is going to work here because it has worked somewhere else.

Because it's the uniqueness of the problem, the novelty of the problem, which requires close attention and which is where it brings it back to the question that Prabal was asking earlier.

We cannot just look into secondary research and academic papers.

We have to talk to real people and not just one kind of people, not one group of people, but different kinds of people.

And when we look at that, you also need to see who are the invisible ones, who are the hidden ones, what are the hidden factors and what does this speak?

What is not there in front of us speak so much about what the systems around us are, right?

So in that,

we need to also then look at what are we doing to ensure that our idea or the solution is truly inclusive?

Because we often, again, talk about, I mean, something, again, we were talking about with respect to technology earlier, that inclusion is not just about giving access.

We need to look at what it means, right?

So for example, the other day, someone I saw on social media, who was an activist, she was talking about how, you know,

There are these communities where the government was supplying ration since the time the lockdown had started.

And the ration primarily had been rice and potatoes and some lentils.

And these children in that area, when they were being asked, what do you want?

See, they don't talk the language that someone else is speaking.

So they said, we want some potato chips.

And so it's as simple as that, some fruitcakes and some potato chips.

And the point is you might argue that, well, when people can't eat, you should be eating whatever is available to you.

And then like, this is such a fancy, but then ultimately who are we to judge?

It's also trying to understand whether what you think is enough for people is that really enough, you know, at least to understand that.

Um, and similarly, uh, isn't the process of moving around jargon, the meaning is getting lost and so is the.

And then who will then benefit from our ideas?

It's really important to ask that because I might be academically very sound and I might tick all the boxes which are required.

But then it should not end up being on exercises, again, like proving our intellectual prowess.

It's more important that the meaning is actually written.

The meaning shouldn't be lost and the purpose should not be lost.

And then we really need to understand and ask if there is anybody who will benefit from our ideas and who are these people who are going to benefit.


SPEAKER_06:
On the same line, why would somebody be interested in our solution or our innovation?

Why are we saying that what we are suggesting in the first place is different?

Very importantly, this is the question that we always ask.

Is the solution viable, feasible or desirable?

And what do we have to back our claim if we claim that

it is all of these three, what are we basing our claim on?

You want to expand on that a bit, the viability?


SPEAKER_12:
Yeah, I mean, I think all these three factors are very important.

And sometimes what happens is

The beginning of any problem framing itself is so full of assumptions that what we claim as a problem might not be the actual problem.

The problem might be somewhere else, and we are not even seeing it.

So the solution that we are therefore designing

theoretically you might say that it's viable but what is it that we have in order to blackout claim so this whole aspect of user testing or prototyping of that idea is very important and the reason why complexity as an approach is very important is it does enable one if one really kind of

immerses oneself within it, all these different parts, the viability part, the feasibility part, the desirability part, all kind of can be cooked together while we create actionable concepts.

So then from the parts to the whole, this movement and how, as we say, this is like a complex adaptive system, understanding how the environment is affecting the system and the parts

Is there a self-organization that's happening that you are not even considering?

You're constantly thinking that it has to be done.

Like whatever you do, the impact has to be from the outside and we are not realizing the self-organization part of it.

What kind of interactions are happening?

What is it that's emerging?

You know, these are the questions which are the very basic

of complexity science but when asked in the context in the right way and again bringing it back to what we started with if you can frame questions which are powerful and difficult and authentic using complexity science we believe that uh this aspect can be taken care of very well you know yeah so um you know coming back to the slide uh and and again uh you know to stress upon the point


SPEAKER_06:
uh that we have been trying to make what is the you know can we envision who uh what an intended user is before and after an intervention it could be even uh in terms of an academic paper because we've seen that a lot of teams are actually looking at writing a paper if not prototyping too uh what do we perceive as a shift that might happen due to the intervention even a paper you know it doesn't have to be a product to service a

a prototype, whatever it be, even a paper, can it create a shift in the user?

Or is it, again, coming back to the point that we were trying to raise earlier, is it something that I am doing which serves my own needs or which serves the collective needs of the team which is writing that paper?

Or is it serving

to create a shift in the user, the reader, the academic, the student, the researcher who reads your paper once you've made it?

Who does it create a shift in?

Or does it create a shift at all?

Another important question, what role do feelings play in our innovation?

Can we share stories?

And storytelling, whether in terms of business or otherwise, is something that we work upon.

Our lives are full of stories.

I relate to myself as a story, you know, because I have this set of stories about myself, which is completely and always playing in my head.

How I view myself worth in a way depends on the story that I tell myself, whether it is about me, whether it is about the people in my life, whether it is about relationships at work.

All of these are construed by a mind through stories.

So can we share stories and do these stories go just beyond people or about other forms of life as well?

If we are very data centric, if we are, as we call it, if we are stuck in the intellect, can we also be looking at some sense making through stories and narratives while we look at data?

This is something also which comes across in the corporate world now.

With so many data solutions and analytics and ML and AI, you've got a huge amount of data and very few people who really understand what the data is telling us.

Is there a way that we can tell that story?

What is it that that byte of data wants to say?

And can we, since the data cannot speak for itself, can we speak for the data?

What story do I tell?


SPEAKER_12:
Yeah.

Also the patterns that come out of the data, right.

Those from the meta narratives and trying to capture the narrative, the sub narratives and the meta narratives, there's a plot, there is a climax, you know, there is a movement in data.

So data is not something which is like just data sets.

And again, just talking about it.

So how do we really make data brilliantly, uh, you know, used meaning making tool or a sense making tool.

And yeah, do we have a roadmap in place?

That's something which is really, really important.

And this is particularly in connection to today that we don't have too much time.

And there is so much energy, so much of experience and knowledge, such kind of diversity.

I mean, I was so excited when I was going from one room to another to see the kind of conversations that were happening.

So it's really going to be a pity if

there is no roadmap which is drawn because it's time bound today.

It's going to end.

So is there a vision behind that for the teams to sort of think about what now, then what, then what should be the next steps?

I mean, and it's okay for the teams to not have all the answers today, but what's very important is as they're together, this is a brilliant opportunity

we would say a communion or a marketplace where we have a variety of different perspectives, different contexts, different experiences are all coming together.

And like we had been talking about it from the very beginning that we are at least all of us are trying not to make it into an innovation theater where you just have

you're coming up with design solutions, which are popular.

Many people might be liking them, but they might not have any real value, right?

We are not trying to do that.

So if that's the case, there has to be some vision shorter term and longer term about it and not to kind of misuse it in the sense that, Oh, this was a brilliant weekend.

And then it's just gone.

So I think that's something which we feel should be appreciated.

definitely be considered by the team.

And as we said, that these are not questions that, what do we say?

Not all the questions are relevant for everybody, but many questions are relevant for most people is what we think.


SPEAKER_28:
Thank you so much, both.

It was a unique presentation.

I really appreciate this stepping in.

You said it was gonna be just half done, but this was really amazing.

I'm just gonna list a few things I wrote down while I was listening.

First, I really appreciate

that you brought the attention and the visibility to really specific, definite aspects of our current situation.

But also it was mixed in with the general topics and the pattern matching that will help us even when we're looking back through this or when someone else is looking back through it and this super cyclone has been cleaned up and we're on to COVID-27.

It's all going to be still evergreen content because these are really the essentials about going from the specifics to the general.

Not staying up here, but also not staying down here.

They're both important, but it's when you walk back and forth in the same slide, in the same sentence, in your dialogue, it helped me understand how important it is to have the specifics as well as the general.

And it just also teaches us how to generalize from the beginning.

of the presentation, I just noticed that your style involves questions, whereas usually people think about a presentation as listing points.

And so I thought, what is it that they're doing differently with the presentation style?

And then I realized that you could probably reformat the slide with bullet points, and it's saying things to consider, A, B, C.

Or have you considered A?

Have you considered B?

And so it's the same content in a sense, but then the reality is that because it's interpreted or unpacked differently, it's not the same content.

And so even if A, B and C are on the slide to have a question rather than to make it look like the presenter is giving an answer was really special.

And the last point and maybe where we could just continue talking a little bit would be you talked about information flow as well as the flow of workers, of resources, of essential goods.

Things are moving just all over the world and the movement patterns are changing.

This is the most complex thing.

This is global scale.

It's every single modality.

It's every time scale.

So how would you recommend that a team or an individual jumps in?

Because you've set the stage where we need everyone's perspective, all hands on deck because it's global.

And then where would you recommend that a young person

or somebody who had a career experience and now they're learning about thinking this way.

Where would a beginner in complexity be able to make an impact and be valuable?


SPEAKER_12:
I think it's very important to choose, at least to start with a context, right?

Because already the context of COVID-19 is there, which is why we are doing the hackathon at least now, right?

So it is important to bring it down to a level of a particular geopolitical or sociocultural kind of a context.

And something that we were talking about earlier is that it doesn't mean that you narrow it so much that you lose sight of the bigger idea.

You keep the bigger idea in mind, because at the end of the day, to give an example, when there is a lockdown happening in a little part of India and say there is a lockdown that's happening in China,

in a global world, it's affecting us in ways that we can't even think about.

So for example, people are writing here saying that my laptop has, something in the laptop is not working.

And although there are mechanics here, for example, and maybe a store is open, I'm not saying they're open, but just to give you the complexity of the situation, you might not be able to do anything with it because that particular part might be coming from China.

And the moment there is a flight that doesn't work between the two, you stop getting those things.

I mean, last month, I remember, I mean, this is like our lockdown had begun in March, right, in India.

Sometime in April, I remember, we were not getting chilies and ginger, which in Indian cooking, these two are very often used, right?

And we were trying to figure out what is happening because Amazon and big basket, and these are like big online grocery stores.

They're taking the orders and then they're canceling it.

And they will sort of start understanding that even within India, because there is no interstate movement, then there are so many other things.

I mean,

the complexity that there are lots of, for example, migrant workers who do not just work as construction workers in a city throughout the year, you know, many of them actually do two things.

So there are times during the year when they're actually farmers.

So they go back and they farm.

So, you know, it's so interrelated, right?

So one thing leads to another, that leads to another.

And I think you rightly said that.


SPEAKER_06:
Speaking about chillies, we found that

since the migrants had left the state, there was nobody left to pick the chilies and hence, you know, things weren't moving.


SPEAKER_12:
So yeah, I mean, I think,

What we are trying to also talk about is that you will see that beginners in systems thinking, they start understanding feedback and loops and probably draw flowscape.

Now, you can try and understand it in a mathematical modeling kind of way or computation and et cetera.

And again, keep it at a very, what do I say, a theoretical level.

But it can have a socioeconomic kind of a context within which you can use it.

And to us, using complexity science is that, that you take one thing, one aspect of complexity science, put it in an actual context.

As a group, use your multiple perspectives, multiple experiences to unpack it.

It really doesn't matter.

So say if you're in a group where you and I are teaming with each other,

you do not need to understand everything in India.

In fact, the fact that you don't understand everything about India and yet being a global citizen and a human being, you do connect to me, that's good enough for you to ask questions to me, which I might never ask because I might be taking it for granted, right?

So we feel that that's really important.

But starting with the context, starting simple things like why, what, who, where, when, and then moving bigger, bigger, bigger, because then...

Some questions, some problems, some challenges are going to be universal.

It's true that, you know, for example, all over the world, education, for example, in a large way has come to a standstill.

But then what we need to understand, even within India, there are places in India where a classroom might have 90 students and there are international schools where a classroom might have 15 students, right?

So if we make a statement saying, in India, education is getting suffered, which India are we talking about?

Which is why it's very, very important.

And something that we feel is of prime importance here is, again, rather than assuming things, if one member of the team

probably has a real life experience with the context so that he and she can give those stories.

So if I'm working on education, for example, and I take my context that this is in North India, in this particular state, and I'm talking about a government school.

The moment you understand Indian context, you understand which kind of people go to a government school.

You know that all people don't go to the government school.

That's how the system is.


SPEAKER_21:
Public school.


SPEAKER_12:
Yeah.

So government-run school.

So then what happens is if I have at least one member in the team, I have that experience, then I'm not going to come up with mythical answers to who the users are, which is why we were talking about the stories.

Do I have a name and say that

what does the lockdown look like for this particular person in this situation?

And what does the lockdown look like for another person?

And I think that becomes a very tangible, real kind of a context because then when you use some of the methodologies or approaches of complexity, even a particular mathematical model, when you try to use that in a sociological context, it's real and you know what works and what doesn't work.

And you also then know how to contextualize the tool

for the same context.


SPEAKER_28:
I really like that answer.

I like that you just said start where you are with whatever's happening right now, whatever the situation that you see, don't wait for someone else to tell you that there's another more important issue.

Don't wait for someone to tell you even how to specifically address it.

Just if you see the problem, it might be something that only you see.

And so you don't want to be a bystander effect in the world that you're the only one who's perceiving.

Then that's not going to be a world where the resolutions that you want to see happen.

So starting with the problems that are specific that you see, like, wow, this team at work, it's not really coming together.

So that's a systems dynamics problem.

But it starts off with something that's very specific, very local.

And then just like you were walking us back and forth from the specifics to the general, right?

Once you get into the space where it's like, okay, the specific problem is that this is what's happening with the group.

Then you ask, well, are there other perspectives on it?

How would I have thought about this in the past?

Or how might I envision myself thinking about this in the future?

And then you asked about the who, what, why, where, when, and how.

And then I was thinking, okay, that's level one, when.

And then the second one is whose version of when or why are we asking when or why are we asking why?

It's like you go, well, who says that?

Yeah.

There's not just one why.

The question why is to get us into the space where we're talking about how things are happening.

But then the multiple perspectives are actually where we are.

The multiple perspectives are how we answer these questions about who, what, why, where, when.

It's not that we take stock of the perspectives and then we converge on the answer.

It's like we're holding this perspective with us as we move through the details and then we analyze out and we narrow back down as we need to.


SPEAKER_12:
Yes.

And I think that's where it boils down to when you consider lived narratives and experiential perspectives, then one of the things that a lot of times people do is they will actually use an opinion and call it a perspective.

or they will use an opinion and call it a fact.

So I think the assumptions are then broken when you talk from your lived experience, your embodied experience.

And it's really like you can see what's happening in the world now because when people are talking about vaccines and all of that, and then there are these different kinds of theories that whether your knowledge of Ebola or your knowledge of swine flu or your knowledge of malaria, whether that's really going to be helpful or not.

So the question is, do we spend all our time in, even say from a biological point of view or from a public health point of view, are you just going to spend all your time in looking at swine flu and Ebola and malaria and whatnot?

Or are you going to also rather focus on what's happening now and try and understand it as it comes?

Because then that's what we were trying to say, that are we constantly being guided by the past?

Or we are really allowing the future as it emerges and leading from it.

Because that's the kind of leadership that we need at this point.

And when we say leader, I think the problem is that we think a leader is a political leader.

I think all of us are leading in some way or the other.

I mean, you can be a biologist, you can be a computer scientist, you can be a health worker, you can be a teacher, anybody for that matter.

But are we leading from these spaces, I think is...

What needs to be seen?

Yeah.


SPEAKER_28:
Yep.

I think we can almost ask about archetypes in complexity.

There's the archetype of the beginner and everyone has an aspect of the beginner because as we brought up so many times, the space that we're discussing is the realest thing in the world and it's the most complex thing in the world.

So everyone is a beginner.

And so there's always this kernel of taking a fresh approach to it.

and listening to anyone else's perspective.

So that's one archetype that I kind of extracted.

Then there's the domain expert, the person who studies how the protein folds or studies exactly how distant should the rows of corn be, really specific details that are life and death.

And they often require extensive training and there's a professional community and they have jargon and they have their approaches to the problem.

And the dance is to respect expertise and the time that these people have invested without simply saying, oh, well, that's an incomplete approach.

It's not just that that's an incomplete approach.

We have to provide an on ramp to the center where everybody is coming together.

And then a third one would be leadership.

And so that really may be my next area of question for you is not just one archetype of a leader.

It's not just the one person at a podium who's giving some sort of oration.

So what does leadership look like in this global and it's a digital context?

What does leadership look like and how can we all make sure that whether we're younger or older or anywhere, how can we make sure that we're allowing that kind of leadership to form?


SPEAKER_06:
I think we kind of looked at it when we talked about collaborations to Daniel that the kind of leadership we now look towards is what is called resurgent leadership and that is again something which relates to learning from the past but actually taking it as it comes in the present.

So being adaptive is also something which is extremely important and

And somehow, looking at the world at large, a lot of people we call leaders do not really confirm to these requirements anymore.

So I think we need to re-look at

uh who we who we think of as leaders and probably also who we elect as leaders in a way uh you know as being the greatest democracies in the world etc but uh you know so emergent adaptive uh is is very important and and transformative you know somebody uh somebody who who again uh doesn't go back to the past and believes in transforming things uh

depending on the emerging futures, the present that we have now.

So the words that we look for and how we go about is somebody who's regenerative, somebody who's adaptive, and somebody who's looking at transformation in himself or herself or the people around him or her.

It might be an individual.

It might be a group of people.

It might be anybody, as Sudebi was saying.

If we all assume the role of leaders in whatever we do in life, I think then we also break these archetypes.

We don't have to look up towards someone in order to learn, you know, because we can be the learners ourselves and we might be people that others learn from.


SPEAKER_12:
In fact, at the point of regenerative, even how it's used generally, right, like we are

the whole eco-centric worldview, the debate is that let's not just talk about sustainability as our final goal.

Let's talk about regeneration.

And I think something that we are trying to talk about is that if

We plan to go back to business as usual.

Or we talk about, OK, when are we going back to normal?

There is an assumption that the normal as it was just before COVID-19 was the best that could have happened to the planet.

And we know that it's not.

So which means that the usual is not supposed to be the usual.

So which means that sustainability in that way means that you are just trying to sustain.

But if we instead want to reimagine how we could have done it better, I mean, can we go back to a post-COVID world, in a world which is better than how it was earlier, then...

you know, you are not looking for a formula and that's something, I mean, a couple of, I mean, a few months back, there was a conference where I went and someone had asked me about this question about how do you look at leadership and something around that.

And I remember I said, it was a very spontaneous response that you will notice that leaders at different levels, they're constantly using formulas and templates somewhere else.

So in a way you're following, then how are you leading if you're following

what someone else has done, right?

So we feel that as leaders, we need to chart our own paths.

And these paths can be only made by working.

You can't follow somebody else's path and say, oh, I'm leading.

Because again, then we are letting the past guide us.

And when we talk about it, we are not seeing the two undermine or discard the past.

But then you have the past and you have the future.

And in the present, you can bring these things together.

Another point that we had mentioned, I think, in our presentation either yesterday or the day before, that we need to look at the activating forces as leaders.

What are the forces which activate us?

But we also need to understand the resisting forces.

What are the forces which are bringing us down, pulling us back?

And in that between these two, activating and resisting forces is where a new form of leadership emerges.

And yeah, I mean, that way, whether you're a public health professional, if you're an epidemiologist, or you're a public policy analyst, or you're a teacher, all of us are leaders in that way.

And that should be the way to bring us down.


SPEAKER_28:
Thank you for the response and welcome, Jen.

Nice.

Oh, the unveiling.

The unveiling.

So Jen just hopped on right now.

And the Epicenter, if you want to continue and just provide a little bridge or just it's been awesome.

Thank you so much for stepping into this afternoon live stream.

Is there any questions you want to leave us with or any points?

one thing i'll just note is this community and this team is uh perpetual so we're all going to be interacting through the text back and and also we really hope to be organizing future complexity weekend or similar events and anytime that that we can do anything to help what you need uh to get done in your local communities and networks just please reach out so maybe any thank you

Any ending thoughts or questions for Jen or I, then it would be awesome.

I'll let you have a break.


SPEAKER_12:
Actually, do you have any questions?

OK.

I never run out of questions.

I always have questions.

Sorry about that.

But I would say, Daniel and Jen, if I would be asking you, because you have done Complexity Weekend earlier, right?

And I don't know how you had done it.

I mean, was there a burning challenge or an issue that was guiding the way in which you framed it?

Like this time it's COVID-19.

But do you see there are certain differences between those and now?

Even, I mean, today is the last day of the Complexity Weekend 2020.

If I may ask you what would be maybe one or two things which you have unlearned

And what might be one or two things that you have learned, especially for people like you who have been continuing to do this?


SPEAKER_28:
So I'll just answer briefly about last year and then Jen, just take it away with a longer response.

Last year, we didn't have a specific challenge.

It was more about just bringing complexity science to applied problems.

And it was in San Francisco.

and so the kinds of things that groups tended to be interested in were beneficial benevolent uses of technology the economic situation and homelessness and resource distribution in our region specifically and about how the bay area could be a player for good in the world rather than basically a magnet for criticism so that's related to last year but jen please just anything you'd like to add there in relationship to any complexity spaces or otherwise


SPEAKER_23:
so uh i wasn't at last year part of last year unfortunately uh but i have been part of other uh complexity events in the past they're generally a lot longer but they also have this sort of form a team and come up with a project so that you're not just learning um which is fantastic but you're also doing and and i think that that structure

is just super useful and that's why we're using it.

So what are the things that I have learned and what are the things that I have unlearned over this weekend?

That's a fascinating question.

What have I learned?

Now I'm on the spot.

I've really enjoyed listening to all of the other keynote speakers and

Paying attention to the conversations going on and all the different Keybase channels.

For me, I think, you know, we were, I was just in office hours a little bit ago.

It's closed, so, because we're moving on to other stuff.

But Sean and JP and I were in there together without anybody doing office hours.

So we just had this great conversation amongst ourselves.

about how this format has been an opportunity to bring our whole selves into the problem solving.

And like both in the business world and academia, I think especially for women or family people, there's a real drive to kind of be this cipher, is that you don't have an outside life.

You are only your job.

And in this format, we don't really have any opportunity to, as my dog actually comes in right here.

I could move my camera.

He's a giant great Pyrenees, so he's this huge white flop-eared wolf thing.

So if I look at my weird posture, it's because I'm petting a dog over here.

Let's see if I can get his nose in the picture.

So I think the danger of that is that we already have problems with our work lives taking over

our entire beings you know particularly in America we have this this you know working more and more hours and this lack of disconnection to where we can be in different spheres you know when we have a phone that gets our email then we're always on at work so I think that it's a double-edged sword but I think it's one that I think

you know, we're, I know the conversation that we were having is that we were hoping that there'd be opportunities for bringing our more complete, you know, selves, like, you know, watching people parent or have cats that are just like walking across the keyboards while we're all talking has been fantastic.

And, and I think that, you know, I, you know,

And certainly in America, mommies pay the mommy penalty, men, you know, daddies get a daddy bonus in the workplace.

And so I know that in my work in academia, there's points in time that I had two children during graduate school.

But when I was out at conferences, you couldn't tell that I had a partner, that I had kids, people didn't know what my sexual, I mean, like I was just, I was so trained into becoming this cypher because that was, you know, the strategy for being successful is to not look like you have other commitments because, you know, that's the way we construct things.

So I think that opening up a space where we can all be more whole people and have these commitments

still be able to participate in the c-suite in the academic world I mean you know the Academy itself is going through massive massive massive reorganizations like they don't even know like what's gonna happen next like what's gonna happen in the fall is is it's been really fascinating keeping track of that conversation but

When we create these barriers for people to fully participate, we really screen out a lot of people, and we miss these voices.

And, you know, there was some discussion a little bit about bringing your whole embodied experience to problem solving.

And I think that when we create these barriers, we screen out a lot of different perspectives to innovative problem solving, and we just miss what some of the problems are.

Right.

And I mean, that's what I tried to focus on in my talk is, you know, I'm not really like somebody.

My academic work is about analyzing stone tools and paleo climate proxies and how that forces technology change.

I don't spend a lot of time.

talking about the implications for motherhood, but that's what I chose to focus on for those of you who made it to my shared truth talk.

It's not actually something I focus on in my regular work, but I think that when we're talking about whole

questions, you know, if we leave families out and we're just trying to figure out how to maximize economic returns for homo economicus, which is really a very white male construct, then we're missing out.

We're going to create solutions that actually don't function in society.

So making sure that we think about all the different statuses of all of us and being able to bring

ourselves as people who have different statuses to the table.

I think that that's something that in this format with doing the distance hackathon has afforded an opportunity for a lot of people to do.

And I think that insofar as problem solving for all of us together moving forward, I'm hoping that we can bring the positive stuff without us also having to be on email 24 hours a day.

and never take time off and have our work, you know, so that we can also maintain different spheres in our lives.

So those are just some thoughts.

I'm not sure if that covered learning and unlearning, but I'm still, I'm processing, you know, it's kind of like, you know, check back in three weeks and I could probably answer that question a little bit better.


SPEAKER_28:
I think just to the learning and unlearning and also to Jen's response, it's a multiple time scale question.

There's like the live feedback, there's the delayed feedback of chat, but there's actually the integration component that takes a long time.

And then there's working with these teams and the membership may evolve.

Somebody might drop off for a little bit, come back and you might add somebody who's a trusted colleague of somebody on your team.

And so

we're always embedded in the really short time scales, you know, molecular, molecular vibration, but also the long history of, of just what we're involved in and the intergenerational story that led to us being here and the choices that we can now make.

And so when we just recognize that there's all these timescales at play, and then we can really dive into the moment and just ask all these questions that were raised in your presentation about where to go from here.


SPEAKER_12:
Thank you.

Yeah, so I think we should leave the live room now and let Jen speak, and we'll follow you there.


SPEAKER_28:
Thank you, GFB Center.

Great to have you on.


SPEAKER_12:
Yeah.

Thanks, Daniel.


SPEAKER_28:
Thanks, Jen.


SPEAKER_12:
Bye.


SPEAKER_28:
Cool, Jen.

Thanks for coming on.

So I think we'll have about 15 or 20 minutes.

You don't have to stay on the whole time if you don't want.

But any thoughts or questions or I can ask you something, whatever you'd like.

What was the question you want to ask?

I wanted to ask just over the rooms and the conversations you had this weekend, how do you think people changed in the way that they were peer to peer relating or that they were relating with our facilitators?

How did that change and what different trajectories did you see?


SPEAKER_23:
Well, I think the one thing that I was really struck by is looping back to some of the comments that you made in the opening live streams, which is that this group of people couldn't have gotten together in a hotel conference in San Francisco or any other study.

I've talked to people, you know, some of whom have been sometime colleagues that are down in Mexico, met somebody and helped them work on a team.

And one person is somewhere in America and the other person was in Berlin, I think.

And it was like, it's three o'clock in the morning.

But they were fascinated and engaged.

And they were just, you know, it was fascinating.

I think what they said, and I won't mention their name for a little bit of privacy, but when they heard about this weekend, that it just sounded like too much fun.

And I think that this is kind of the joy of participating in this intellectual venture and meeting new people, and that this really could not have happened

You know, not even if we had all the corporate sponsorship to hand out all of the tuitions and airfare and hotel rooms and so forth in the world, could have this happened in a physical location?

And I think that's actually something really amazing.

And I think that is,

You know, I don't think that in-person conferences are going to go away, but I think that this is really a great new direction.

I mean, because it offers something really different.

And I think those connections, making those connections are really profound.

And so I'm really looking forward to seeing where all these teams are.

You know, I know that people have to get in projects or some sort of presentation in a few minutes.

So that's an end, but it's a beginning too.

So it's like when you're putting together a grant proposal or all sorts of different types of formal writing, you have to have the abstract.

Now, of course, I'm one of those people who write the abstract at the end and not at the beginning.

But when you're reading, you read the abstract first.

But the abstract is just a couple hundred words telling you what's going to come next.

So I kind of think like these presentations are a little bit of, you know, they're, you know, they're, they're going to be like a bit of a, just like a proposal or, or an abstract as opposed to kind of what the finished, you know, where this is.

And, you know, there's going to be a broad variety of different products.

Uh, and I'm really excited to see kind of the seeds that germinate and, and kind of come forth out of this.

Um,

But, um, um,

So yeah, I think soon we'll be finishing up for just this little piece that we're doing, but it's a beginning.

And I think that as Complexity Weekend happens in the future, hopefully people will come back that they got something great out of it and that they want to continue doing this and maybe change roles also.

And so yeah, I think that while we're coming towards one transition, it's also transitioning into something much bigger.

and with way more capacity for these really fruitful connections.


SPEAKER_28:
I agree well said.

One question and a trade-off that has to come into the design of the event is like, is this about consuming or is this about producing a deliverable?

And by highlighting the communities and the teams and the networks that we form that are formal and informal,

It's like, well, yes, there's a deliverable, there's a checkpoint, but it's the beginning of a longer process.

By highlighting and just centering the idea that we're connecting in a new and different way, all of a sudden these questions about, well, is it going to be consumptive and passive or high-pressure, deliverable oriented, I'm going to get graded on my presentation.

It's neither.

It's in the middle where we're enjoying and consuming and co-creating

the community.


SPEAKER_23:
Yeah.

And for me, I think like this is the fun.

I mean, you know, I'm a nerd and like to think about stuff and learn new stuff.

So, I mean, but that's for me.

And I imagine a shared value is just the enjoyment of learning and the enjoyment of meeting new people.

And so, you know, I think it's like, you know, yeah, we need to have a structure, but I mean,

it's the, the bringing of, you know, we're bringing our whole selves.

We're meeting in a group that we haven't, uh, you know, haven't met each other before.

It's a little ephemeral.

Will we ever meet again?

I mean, you know, a man can't jump into the same river twice, can't step on the same river, you know, same river twice.

Um, so I think that, uh, um,

you know it'll be really interesting to see this organization as it evolves because you know you know we've also said you know we are a complex adaptive system too and how do we change as an organization and and by that i mean also like the individual groups because like there's leadership i know i was listening to the discussion about leadership and my experience of leadership is that there's natural leaders there's leaders everywhere i used to be a community organizer for acorn a long long time ago

And my job was basically to know that leaders existed out there in the world and to go door to door in the neighborhood, finding out what are the issues that the neighborhood wanted to care about, you know, cared about what they wanted to change and what expectations they wanted from their local governments.

And then who are the people that could really like, you know, who had the bandwidth and,

and a little bit of extra energy and the drive to be able to speak to their neighbors about this a little bit more.

And then I just gave them institutional support.

I'd say, hey, you're new to this.

There's these different things that you could do.

You can ask your city council member to come out and do a walkthrough with your neighborhood so that you can physically point to problems that need to be addressed and then extract

promises from them, that they were going to deal with these things.

There's other actions that you can take.

And so I think the process of helping people learn, and so leaders can come from anywhere.

We're all around us.

It's not, you know, and there's tons of different leadership styles also.

There's top-down leadership.

There's from the side leadership, kind of more military.

There's bottom-up.

There's from the middle, which is one of the really kind of fascinating leadership styles.

And I've seen when some of the conversations going on in all of the different channels that, you know, that there's quite a bit of that going on.

with amplifying each other's voices and and kind of bringing the groups together and that

that this is a sort of event that can empower people to kind of get, you know, what is it that we can change, that we want to change, and to, you know, kind of give people a little bit of structure, which is, you know, what the job is that I, you know, had as a neighborhood organizer.

So maybe this is kind of like a global neighborhood organizer for complexity.

You know, maybe that's kind of like, you know, like a framework that I'm thinking about, you know, my experience with all of this right now.

So, so it's been really fun, you know, because it's not, you know, to work with people to kind of help them bring their projects to life.

So and how they want to engage with things moving forward.


SPEAKER_28:
I really like that spatial organizational question and going to the necessity of the embodied perspective.

We hear a lot about top down and bottom up, which makes us think about things like hierarchy and ranking or pecking order.

And then you brought in from the middle and from the side.

And those are just new spatial ways that just obviate the question of who's on top.

It's like, who's at my side?

It's like, well, I have a bunch of sides and there can be a lot of people who are collaborating with me at my side.

Or how do we lead from the inside?

How do you start from yourself and then just go out?

Or how do you lead from the outside where you say, I'm just a vessel and I'm just going to be totally aware and let the outside come through.

and they're just different spatial metaphors ultimately, and they're lifted from the context of the organizational chart or the hierarchy and put into the territory of ecology and dance and improv, all these things that everybody accesses and everybody has two sides or multiple sides, but not everyone is on the top or on the bottom.

There's just so much power in the way that you're describing it like that.


SPEAKER_23:
Well, so I'm, you know, an anthropologist and archaeologist.

And one of the questions that we have to face is, you know, how do you relate to somebody that's been dead for 10,000 years?

Like, you know, I can't, I'm not Kreskin, you know, I don't have,

psychic powers that i can connect but the thing is we do all have bodies and we live in this three-dimensional space and you know in a fourth dimension of time and you know we have certain things that are the same like you know we have temperature parameters that are kind of most optimal we need a certain amount of of food calories and certain nutrients and so i think that you know really having these embodied visions and that yeah we don't just live in a vertical existence you know we we live

Really, most of the time we actually live in a pretty horizontal existence.

And, you know, as we live on the surface of a planet, unless we happen to be flying or swimming or an aerialist.

So, you know, yeah, just kind of definitely breaking out of like, you know, these top down or, you know, like, yeah, the vertical orientation and thinking about all the different ways.

And, you know, we can go to our bodies and, you know, I'm not a dance major, but I'm sure somebody who had more experience with that could probably, you know, really expand on that.

But, you know, I think we can find a common sense because we we do have bodies.

Right.

And then what we can do with that is, you know, understand, you know, people do, you know, find ways to kind of link up and make these small organizations.

And yeah, and I think that.

So, you know, there's lateral exchanges of, you know, economics, for example, as learning money to your sister or your brother because they are 50 bucks short on their electric bill.

And, you know, is a different way of organizing ourselves than, you know, I get money for my job and then it goes to the bank and then it goes out to my utility or whatever.

is just kind of thinking about how we really exist as humans.

And I think that moving towards these, like, yeah, trying to think about ourselves more and who is next to me and how do we communicate to each other and form shared goals and make this happen.

And so I think that maybe when we're sitting in a hotel

conference hall you know in the little breakout rooms it tends to we tend to default back to this top-down structure right and when we sit around a conference table oftentimes it's the people who are most comfortable speaking who are the voices that we hear and and i'm one of those people who's you know we share a different phone call

And I'm clearly a person who's comfortable speaking, which is interesting on a gendered point of view because of the way people perceive that.

But I really have to focus on remembering to take time and slow down and have long, uncomfortable pauses.

And whatever's uncomfortable for me, I have to let that run several times because other people have different cognitive processes.

And just because they don't,

have a loud voice and speak quickly on the fly doesn't mean that we shouldn't be hearing them.

They frequently have more time to process and get to a deeper understanding than somebody who just is comfortable shooting their mouth off.

So I think that all of the different channels that we have going on, I'm hoping that that created some opportunity.

I'm really looking forward to seeing feedback afterwards about this and how people experienced it.

Because I feel like with all the different channels that there is this opportunity for people who are not necessarily comfortable going, ooh, me, me, me, to still get heard.

So I think just, yeah, thinking about leadership and contributions in different ways.


SPEAKER_28:
very nice and really something helpful as a capstone in all these discussions about leadership and collective sense-making collective collaboration and yes this first one it was kind of like it was the tech bump and the community bump and all these things were being um tackled at once

And ideally, as people become more familiar with each other, they know a few edges.

They know, okay, well, I'm going to next month's event or next year's event, and I know a few of these people already, and I'm familiar with the tech, and just reducing the friction so that things can be happening effectively.

and i totally agree it's um uh i don't even remember who brought it up but just it's the job of the uh visible leaders to make sure that all of these perspectives are able to to come to the forefront and so we have a unique opportunity to do that not just with the geospatial and the cognitive diversity we have here but with the synchronous and the asynchronous component

and the ability for just like, you know, hit an emoji, just I'm gonna pre-populate this with a yes and a no.

And so people won't even know which one you voted on unless they investigate or there's so many ways that people can explore how to use their identity differently and just play new roles and how to relate to the 10,000 year old person,

when they didn't have computers and how to look past the digital surroundings that we're using, that we're swimming in.

It's hard enough to imagine 200 years ago.

How do we really take it back to 10,000?


SPEAKER_23:
I think that this is an opportunity to think about how can we relate to people that we're all relatively tech-enabled and that makes us relatively privileged.

is, you know, it's, you know, we still need a certain amount of warmth, heat, safety, food, and this can create opportunities for looking, you know, across cultures and like, you know, we can really build bridges.

And I was very, very struck and also looking back to some early themes, this is the talking to stakeholders.

And we may be stakeholders in some of our solutions, but we also may need to go out and talk to a broader amount of people for, you know, this is, we get, so I know when I look at my newsfeed, it tends to focus on the developed technologically advanced and fairly wealthy part of the world.

And I think that

if we only try and solve problems for that part of the world, we are not going to solve any COVID-19 problems because we don't live in isolation from each other.

I know that, so I live in Seattle, the West Coast of America has been having huge problem with homelessness, for example.

And if, so where do you wash your hands?

And I've seen on a neighborhood Facebook group, somebody complaining about a hand washing station being put up in front of public land space in the neighborhood that is adjacent to where their property is.

And they're like, I already have enough problems.

And somehow this is going to be some draw to people.

But the thing is, that person also goes to the local grocery store.

The unhoused people in our community also go to the grocery store too.

And so if you're not solving problems for everybody, like in terms of disease transmission, for everyone in the community, you're not going to make your part of the community any better.

uh and i think that that we need to to you know look at the things that we have in common to find those connections and we also need to reach out directly and hear their voices directly and not just imagine what they're saying uh and uh so that we can get deeper deeper understandings and you know we can

You know, it's not necessarily total altruism.

It is, you know, very practical in terms of actually solving the problems, the absolute gargantuan problems that seem overwhelming, that the world is, you know, going through this huge change.

And I don't think that...

you know, when we look at the flu pandemic from 1918, there were some really substantial social changes, social organization changes that went on afterwards.

And there was a lot of like, let's get back to normal, but, you know, but, you know,

There was political changes globally.

There was social changes in terms of labor organization in the Western parts of the world.

So making sure that we get voices from everyone and that we can relate to each other based on our shared embodiedness and bring those voices and bring those stakeholders in, I think is a much richer opportunity for really solving some of the issues that we have in front of us.

Anyway, Sean just jumped in, so I figured we'd see what's going on there.


SPEAKER_28:
Thanks so much for being a facilitator, for exploring a lot of these topics on the weekly timescale where we've been able to converse.

I really appreciate it so much.

I look forward to where we go together.


SPEAKER_23:
I am really excited too.

And I think it's transition time to something, another activity.

So I'll sign off.

I've had a great time working with everyone.

Hit me up on Keybase.

if you wanna keep on talking and I look forward to seeing what everybody's done.

All right, bye-bye.

Bye Jen, thank you.


SPEAKER_28:
Nice.


SPEAKER_18:
Welcome back, Sean.

Yay.

This has been very interesting.

I just posted complex systems like an online global hackathon are often messy, having fun yet.


SPEAKER_28:
Yes.

I think it's been fun so far.

It's 1.47 PM PST and our first scheduled presentation of the teams is going to be at 2 PM with the COVID-19 public policy team.

What we're going to do for the next 12 minutes and JP will jump on as well.

What we're going to do for the next 10 minutes is just set up the stage for the presentations and just Sean, go ahead.


SPEAKER_18:
Sure.

Yeah.

I didn't have any time to prepare anything, but basically, you know, we're going to be doing 10 minute presentations per team or 10 minute time slots per team.

We've got one, two, three, four, five, six, seven teams are going to be presenting.

And so the teams are going to kind of pop into live stream.

They're going to share their screen, talk about the project they're working on.

really that they've just begun, right?

So it's just the formative stages still of their team working on it.

They're going to present for around five minutes and then we're going to have Monica and JP when they come on, we're going to have kind of a panel discussion of like, oh, interesting, you know, here's some feedback for the project.

And maybe we can crowdsource some of the feedback from general would be awesome.

And then we'll move on to the next team and we'll just kind of cycle through the teams 10 minutes at a time.

Cool.


SPEAKER_28:
I'm looking forward to it.

And just looking at the seven that we have signed up, I know there are several other initiatives that people are carrying forward.

For example, related to curating high quality data and making data accessible for the kinds of questions that we were working on this weekend, as well as an art and visualization section.

So if any of the artists out there who are working in the art sub team

maybe from 3 10 to 3 30 we can have some time to look at art or if anyone else wants to share anything or contribute and that you're watching this live and you can just message me at doxology and we can see if we can find a time to get you on because this is actually the time where the community is going to speak back through the live stream to itself

So we hope that people will be really engaged on the general chat and giving support, asking questions that are extending what people are saying, telling them what it reminds them of, big raucous emojis, et cetera.

Hey, JP.


SPEAKER_18:
This is so much fun.


SPEAKER_28:
Nice.

Yeah, and pretty good functionality from Jitsi.

No problem with a five-hour live stream.

How are you doing, JP?

How was your last few hours?


SPEAKER_19:
I am excellent.

Buzzing around the bumblebee experiences, I like to say.

So checking in with various people and teams and, you know, just making sure or not making sure, but just kind of sampling the space of the entire depth and breadth of this thing.

So I'm feeling really good.


SPEAKER_28:
Cool.

So what do you think we can prepare on our side?

How can we prepare to hear these presentations and to give them the most useful feedback?

We talked so much in the planning about the trade-off between making a deliverable and getting people to the end of some sort of a presentation or a minimum viable product.

Those kinds of things are really emphasized in the startup weekend approach.

And then at the same time, grappling with this long-term nature of the groups that we're forming with and these long-term problems that we're trying to address.

So any thoughts there now that we've not just been theoretically planning it, but really doing like 90% of it?


SPEAKER_19:
I think that's the fun part about a hackathon of this nature is it's kind of rapid deployment, rapidly throwing things together, rapidly getting it off the ground, so to speak.

In this context, it's kind of like rapid research.

It's like, what do we want to do and what inspires us as individuals, what inspires us as groups?

You know, the process that goes from there is a process I actually look forward to.

It's kind of like we've auto-catalyzed the seeds of projects that will grow into something.

And I really liked the idea of, you know,

rapid creativity, and then we plant those things, and then we see how they develop over the course of the coming weeks, months, into the future.

So that's what has me really excited for seeing what comes forward, seeing the results of our kind of epic hackathon.

I mean, this is

likewise this is actually a new experience for me i've never done a hackathon before um i think it's i think it's a really cool space um and then um you know uh whether we're sprinkling complexity on it or whether we're growing up from the basis of complexity i mean i'm all about those dualisms this weekend um i'm excited to see how people have interpreted what we're saying i use the word earlier it's like we're in a reverse panopticon so everybody can see in

to what we're doing, we can't see out.

So, you know, here we go.


SPEAKER_18:
Yeah, I want to speak to that because the experience of actually trying to organize this event has been really interesting because it's all online.

Really, we can't see much.

Like the whole point of getting everyone on Keybase and having the teams form their own Keybases

is that they are fluent in these tools now and they've created the infrastructure for their own teams, but we are not necessarily a part of that.

Lots of teams have their own spaces now that we don't see into at all.

It's just been so interesting having

you know, very little information to go on and just kind of what information we can glean to still kind of help.

If we're in a room together and we can just walk from team to team right now, what do you guys do now?

What are you doing now?

Okay.

Where are you?

Like, that's not possible right now.

Um, we're, we're finding other cool things that we can do that we couldn't do in person, but alternatively, we can't do some things that we could do in person.

So it's been very challenging, but yet interesting and fruitful.

So it's been pretty cool.


SPEAKER_19:
That's what's so incredible to me.

I mean, it's,

I'll return to what I've been saying because it's just repetition helps you kind of

Understand something yourself, too.

I mean for being a free event the production quality of this thing is really The tools they're all free tools, too, right?

It's the tools it's the effort everyone's making You know, it's it's it's our willingness to Adapt and be flexible with things.

It's Participants ability to be flexible with things.

Um you know, so as a as a

As a project, I'd say Complexity Weekend is coming together really nicely.


SPEAKER_18:
That's cool.

I want to refer back to Dan's question about how can everyone in general right now give feedback to the teams.

I think some things that we didn't quite have enough time for this Complexity Weekend, we'll make more time for next time, is really that stakeholder feedback and setting side times that they can have calls, teams can have calls with people who have the lived experience of the systems that they're working in.

And so suggesting connections like, like, oh, your product's awesome.

I think it could really use feedback from my friend who is a nurse or my friend who works in a factory, you know, supplying PPE or, you know, whatever is relevant to the project.

That would be awesome to see in general and post in general while people are watching.

And then also helping people because we are we were we saw earlier a much more academic leaning crowd.

A lot of projects have that academic goal in mind.

And just nudging in the general comments, the teams toward what is immediate impact they can have during the pandemic, and then what can be a paper after, or what could be a generalization of that after, helping them frame that.

If you see something in the presentation that's a little bit maybe too far, like we're going to write a paper in five months from now,

maybe just try to reel it back and say, that's really interesting, but you should probably test this and that assumption by trying this in the next month.

You know, that's really helpful.


SPEAKER_28:
Agreed, agreed.

And really, the part that I think is the tiebreaker is we can always redirect to the community and say, well, there's a tradeoff between synchronizing people on the concepts and allowing free space for them to network and allowing them time to reach out to the stakeholders and also having the facilitators.

Right.

Right, we can't make you stay up for 72 hours in a row, and even if we could, you still would feel like you could have had more time to have that conversation with somebody or to have another one of our facilitators speak to you or help you with a pitch, and it's okay.

The shortness of the weekend should remind you just to be focused on what you're focused on now because there's a lot happening, but know that we're all linked cryptographically through this team.

So actually we're going to be able to come back again and again as our schedules allow, as we change through time as well to really bring about these kinds of long range visions that we have.


SPEAKER_18:
Nice.

We're almost there.

We've got three minutes.

I'm so pumped.


SPEAKER_28:
Yeah, so I'll make sure to ping our waiting room facilitators so that they know when the team will join at just one minute before 2 a.m., 2 p.m.


SPEAKER_21:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_19:
I mean, that's been the, I mean, that was our revelation, right?

It's realizing, you know, oh, we're on a globe.

You know, there's the other half of the world, so.

I hope for those of us who are, you know, the sun is now descending or the clock is probably ticking over to midnight, if not earlier.

You know, I really thank everybody out there who, you know, was able just to join and put in the time, you know, early mornings, late hours.

It's magical and fantastic.


SPEAKER_28:
For those who are about to be watching live and presenting in a later group, we have a 10-minute slot per group.

And it's going to be the COVID-19 public policy group in just a minute.

And then we'll talk about COVID information transmission, sick bugs, lean food supply, viability of online learning for frontline workers during COVID-19, resilience ontology, and then COVID impacts mental health.

So we're going to hear from these seven groups, which there are other groups forming.

These are the seven that just wanted to get up on a public live stream and present about it on such a short time scale.

So we're going to have a 10 minute slot for each one of the groups.

And we hope that everybody is really active in the general providing the feedback.

And then while they're presenting,

All three of us are going to be muted and Monica might join and she'll be muted as well.

And we'll just let the presenters, one or a few of them from the team speak.

And if they want to take up much of the 10 minutes, it's totally fine.

But at the end of 10 minutes, that's when the time slot is up.

So it looks like our two first guests, Eli and Steve and Marissa and someone else.

So it's awesome.

I'm really excited to hear from all of you in this unique tandem group presentation format.

And if you have any questions, just feel free to send via the back end.

But otherwise, all the attendees of the conference are rooting for you in general.

And let's just hear from your group.

So it's yours.


SPEAKER_16:
Okay, thank you.

Okay, great.

I'm going to get my screen shared here.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so Eli's going to screen share and put up our slides.


SPEAKER_16:
Can everyone see this?


SPEAKER_05:
There we go.

Looks good.

Okay, so I will get started.

We are the COVID-19 public policy team.

There is a really complex web of interactions of all sorts of variables that affect how the COVID situation is playing out.

They have, to some extent, informed public policy interventions which have taken place.

But without a high-level map or understanding of those interactions, one can just be shooting in the dark public policy-wise.

So our approach is rather than, we are wanting to take a data-oriented approach to public policy, but rather than just doing analysis of correlations or rather than just letting a...

deep learning system blindly process the data and chew on it.

We wanted to take the approach of coming up with a proposed model of the interactions and letting the data inform us about how well that's working.

So let's look at the next slide.

This is us.

Continue next.

Okay, this is a model that we put together to map out some of the interactions.

It might look like there's a bunch on there, but it's actually a pretty high level broad

overview uh what you should really look at here is that there is a particular variable at the bottom right that we are looking to maximize we want to maximize the sum of perceived states of individuals how well they're doing broadly speaking we have a positive impact from that of their financial situation and a negative impact of uh

COVID fatalities, which we want to try to minimize.

So the way this is set up, there are arrows between the variables.

The positive sign at the end of an arrow indicates that the variable at the tail end increasing leads the variable at the head to increase.

Notice all the way on the left there we have

uh three interventions in rectangles restricting mobility interfering with rent and mortgage payments and distributing public funds and we have arrows from the variables in this case indicating whether the variable should be a positive influence on increasing the amount of that intervention or a negative sign indicating it should

cause us to hold back on the intervention.

And generally speaking, as we go to the rest of the presentation, what we're looking to do is think about how to use this to ask reasonable questions about which

variables are impacting others you know are we picking the right influences here are we missing any how can we quantify this how can we define for one variable to another how much of an impact does it have or from a variable to a intervention how much should we be ramping it up what qualitative

aspects are there to the interventions and how could different forms of intervention have different impacts on the variables.

So I think I better move on and let others in the group take it from there.


SPEAKER_22:
So at this stage, we started to analyze the mobility dataset and here you can see MDS of the

most sisterly data points at the top and at the bottom.

And on the right, you see the most informative features in this data set.

And possibly we could further analyze this system through this feature set.

And the next slide.

On the next step, we gathered Oxford dataset.

And here you see PCA analysis.

And as was very interesting, in the left bottom corner, you see that three features explain almost 100% variance of the dataset.

So also we can further analyze each of the components and the features that compose them.

And on the right, you see how specific countries and specific economies further display on this three-dimensional space.

And on the next slide,

we show that there are two, the most informative projections for these two data sets.

And if you look closely and analyze the axis, the features are quite, don't bring us any new

surprises because you would probably think that these features would be the most understandable in these data sets.

So next, Steve would show his insights into the data and the time analysis.


SPEAKER_05:
All right, Eli is up next.


SPEAKER_16:
So this, we kind of juxtapose two data sets together, and we combine them.

And on the x-axis here, you see how stringent the government was in the middle of February.

And on the y-axis here, you see the amount of movement to retail and recreation zones based on Google Maps data.

And so you can see in February, obviously, there wasn't much locking down happening.

And then as you move through the months, you can see these countries, you know, in March, they start to lock down some more.

In April, they're all very locked down, right?

Governments are very stringent and people aren't moving around very much.

And then in May, there's kind of a bounce back as countries start to slowly reopen.

And you can look country by country, for example.

So Korea is an interesting case, right?

They took very stringent government measures, but their people were still moving around quite a bit.

Nicaragua, on the other hand, their government was not especially responsive to the coronavirus, but their people were still moving around to retail and recreation zones almost 30% under what Google Maps decided was the baseline.

So this kind of gives you a country-by-country overview of how effective the restrictive policies were and

the extent to which people's behavior is dependent on those policies.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay, Michelle.

Is she on here?

She is.


SPEAKER_24:
I am, yes.

Sorry, I didn't see the screen.

So yeah, so as we've said, you know, to start off with it, this is such a perfect question.

for complexity science because of all the different interactions and all of the different variables that could contribute to the impacts of and even making decisions around what policies.

So as you saw, we've had a chance to sort of take a quick look at the data that we have currently in terms of the policy interventions and the

orders and the stringency of the orders by country, and then how that correlates to the mobility data that we have.

So are people following the orders essentially is what it's looking at.

There are a lot of other components to look at, and this is such a huge question to look at.

So some of the things we also want to look to add in the future are hospital data,

economic indicators, employment data, the health data, so the exposures, cases, fatalities, measures of mental health that people are starting to put together, and then also the reopening plans.

So really the overall objective of answering these research questions is to be able to recommend better and more precise policy interventions.

you know, refining and validating how all of these variables interact.

And as you know, certainly these are big questions that other people are looking at now.

So I think they're going to be very popular.

There's other researchers looking at the very same things using these data sets.

I think it's also really important for us to keep in mind that whole sort of research community

That's out there and what people are doing with the data, because all of this is so new and we need to help support one another outside of just our own groups to help validate and connect these data points to be able to make a real impact with the questions we're answering.


SPEAKER_18:
Awesome.

Great stuff.


SPEAKER_28:
Thank you so much for the presentation.

Um, just because you took 10 minutes, which is awesome because of the amount of content you conveyed, we're going to move the discussion of that presentation to the Jamboard link that Monica posted in the main chat.

And we'll look for the second group, the COVID information transmission to join.

Thanks so much to this group and you can all hop off the Jitsi.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_28:
Really awesome to see these technologies be used effectively and respectfully by all of our colleagues and our participants.

And so whenever the team comes in and begins, that's going to be when the 10 minutes start.

So there's going to be a minute or two of drift.

But more importantly, everybody who wants to speak and be heard on the live stream, that's our priority.

So we'll be ready for the COVID information transmission group

to come in any moment now.

And again, that Jamboard link, we can probably repost it in the general.

But this is pretty cool.


SPEAKER_21:
It is on.


SPEAKER_28:
All right.

Greetings, Slambert.

It is all you.

And I will start a 10-minute timer.


SPEAKER_15:
Awesome.

Thank you.

All right.

Everyone can see and hear me all right?

You could remove the meet.jitsi.

Move the what, sorry?


SPEAKER_18:
Oh, the hide there.

And then it'll clear up from the screen.

Boom.


SPEAKER_15:
Great.

All right.

So yeah, so our topic was misinformation transmission or how I learned to love the velocity of fake news.

So first, I wanted to give a shout out to our team.

It's a pretty big team, but everyone just picked up wherever anyone was falling off.

And we really all worked on every part of this in different ways.

So I want to say thank you to you guys.

RJ has been awesome as well, really helping facilitate the group, giving guidance.

So yeah, definitely appreciate it.

Big shout out to the team.

So the smaller problem that we wanted to focus on immediately was understanding COVID misinformation transmission.

um so just like any complex space there are a lot of different nodes a lot of different factors that you can place in and so the way we broke it down was we actually first started with accuracy and velocity um diving into accuracy we realized that a sentiment whether positive or negative actually typically removes you from the source of truth or whatever that initial initial fact is um then combining that with velocity shares likes and comments

We then realized that there was a third main parameter that needed to be taken into account.

And if it was ignored, then you wouldn't really get a good idea of the model that was existing.

And that's the actor themselves.

Everything from psychosomatic traits to the frequency of posting of misinformation.

So there's some pages or posters or accounts that have all misinformation.

But then there's some where the misinformation is kind of an oddity.

So looking at that frequency, it was really interesting.

And then one of my personal favorites is looking at some of the parameters to determine whether this source was a bot which was purposely putting out disinformation or just a troll who's putting out misinformation for, let's just say, entertainment value.

So some of the models that we were looking at and some of the flows of making this automated so the models could actually update themselves, this is one of the basic ones that we discussed.

Where we would retrieve a post, we'd have the source of truth filter, which would basically check whatever we've determined our source of truth is, whether that's the WHO, the CDC, regardless of your personal opinions on that.

And then go into the accuracy, sentiment, and velocity, which would then update the actor score.

that operates as the part of the larger complex network um we would then grab the shares go and retrieve those posts and then determine what channels that went down

One really interesting thing here was because a source of truth can get compromised, what do you do there?

And so one of the ways to combat that is you have to validate the source of truth against other sources of truth that are posting similar things.

When you come across a discrepancy, you need to handle that typically using a human.

Because we saw how good Facebook's AI did with checking on good posts versus bad posts.

So some really cool things that we accomplished for today was we did some velocity mapping and distance determination methods.

We explored some psychosomatic traits, which ranged everything from political leanings to personality traits.

On individual posts and accounts, we did some sentiment analysis and account review to test some of our assumptions.

One of the more interesting ones was that one of our assumptions was negative sentiment posts actually were more viral.

And based on the research that we found, it is actually positive sentiments go more viral and that's happiness.

And it actually really related to high arousal versus low arousal, meaning anger or sadness would be low.

And then bot versus troll parameters.

That was fun trying to figure out what's a bot and what's a troll.

So we made a cool word cloud.

Even in times of crisis, typos still remain viral.

But hopefully everyone knows what they're talking about.

This was one of the data sets that we were looking at.

We were able to find a data set of 37,000 users.

We focused on the retweets to determine velocity.

And then we looked at some of the content of those individual ones, as well as which ones were favorited more.

We did some distributions there.

This is a, one of our team members did a dummy data model of connecting related tweets, which we were then going to import the other database that we were just looking at.

We didn't have the time to do that, but that's gonna be one of our immediate next steps.

Speaking of those immediate steps, we're going to finish the analysis using our current parameters and current data sources.

Then we're going to move into an extended analysis.

One of our biggest challenges was actually getting the social media data.

Scraping social media sites, particularly once they remove their APIs, I believe five or six years ago, has become increasingly more difficult.

So we want to find more data sources and the ability to get more of that data so we can perform an extended analysis.

as well as add more parameters for velocity, for measuring sentiment, et cetera.

So we just get a much better data set.

And from that, we'll be able to start making our recommendations for information transition.

One of the things we really want to answer there is, is it easier to slow the spread of misinformation or accelerate the velocity of accurate information through different networks?

Some of the deliverables that we came up with, one of the first being sticking with complexity science and agent-based model visualization of social interactions.

We're actually really close with that.

We should be able to get that out hopefully this week.

One of our personal favorite ones was a Twitter bot that calls out other COVID tweeting bots, gives them a ranking score and goes, hey, you're accurate, or hey, you're terrible.

um misinformation detection and suppression accelerated dissemination of accurate information and then determine of ideal channels by message this was another interesting kind of side thing that popped up is you know based on the message and based on who you want it to spread to you find people that already have those core beliefs and then add certain things to it to facilitate the spread so aside from just focusing on misinformation the way to most accurately deliver a message whatever message you want

might be one of the positive externalities that come out of this research.

So some of our set goals, RJ was nice enough to introduce us to a mad scientist proposal competition.

It's all about information disruption.

And so we're going to try to get a 500 word proposal in and it'd be great to get some funding for this little group we've got going on.

The next would be after all of our analysis completed is determine the most valuable area of focus based on the research that we have available.

Like you saw, there's just so many different areas, even within misinformation, that we could have dove into.

So we really want to take a hard look at, once we've done some of our own analysis, where we can drop into.

And then lastly, develop those transmission solutions, whether that's as simple as the COVID tweeting bot or actually being able to recommend large companies on social media platforms how to deliver their message more appropriately.

Some of the assistants we ran into, I had mentioned this a little bit earlier, but access to more social media data, it's just a little bit difficult to get.

And then stakeholders at large social media companies.

We had some stakeholders chasing down misinformation and smaller social media companies, but that would be great feedback.

So if anyone knows anyone in those two areas or would be able to help out with that, we would all really appreciate it.

And just to kind of wrap up, our current schedule is we want to submit our proposal to Mad Scientist within the next three days.

We wanted to get it out tomorrow, but I know some of the team members haven't even slept.

So props to you guys.

Thanks for pushing through.

But yeah, give us a little bit of breather to get that in by Wednesday.

We want to complete our initial analysis within a week based on what we currently have, and then the extended analysis within a couple of weeks after that.

And then finally, give us a week to go through all of our information and come up with some recommendations.

And we'd love to share those results with you in about a month.

So finally, I just wanted to give a thanks to all the facilitators.

This event would not have gone on without you guys.

It's been great.

This is my first time participating.

So thank all of you for everything.

This has been awesome and a great experience for me.

And I think I want to say the rest of my team, but don't want to speak for them.

And so finally, questions and possible answers.

No guarantees.


SPEAKER_28:
Thank you so much for that presentation.

That was quite interesting.

And just to, again, keep with the schedule and the theme, everybody can go into the Jamboard and they're posting really helpful feedback on the slides that you presented and some of the research directions.

So next up, we are going to be hearing from Sick Bugs, the team.

Thank you, Slambert.

And we are also really appreciative that you mentioned that you'd follow up with our community.

And everyone heard that.

So yes, thank you very much.

You can leave the room.

Thank you.

Hello.

Hello.

That was magical.

That was truly magical.


SPEAKER_01:
Take it away, Gabe.

All right.

Let me first start streaming the screen.

Screen one.

All righty.


SPEAKER_28:
So that's the Jitsi window.

Okay.

Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
Can you see this?

All right.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_28:
See the, yeah.

Present.

And then, yeah.

And then do hit the hide button on the meat.

Jitsi is sharing your screen.


SPEAKER_01:
All right.

And then, um,

Let's see what else.

Can you see my little picture in a picture here?


SPEAKER_28:
Yes.


SPEAKER_01:
All right.

So we're going to launch right into the subject of this project, Environmental DNA and COVID-19, or of Bugs and Bugs.

Team at SickBugs, Complexity Weekend of May 22nd to 24th.

My name is Gabe at Gabe Sarin.

I'll be your guide through this presentation.

So the first thing we'll start with is our ecosystems are complex and interrelated.

what the pandemic has shown us is what we, many fields have kind of overlapped and yielded this result about the interconnectedness of human health, lifestyle, behavioral health, environmental quality, ecological processes, and the physical chemical environment.

The idea of the exposome, the collective foreign biological agents or bioactive agents that enter the human body and the footprint of all of those chemicals and processes in the ecosystem as well.

thinking about the ways in which this is relevant to the public health crisis that's ongoing is we think about the cycles of disease transmission and the necessary task of quantifying outbreaks and forecasting them.

And we also think about the ecological interrelationships of viruses in the environment and how

Animals across the animal kingdom, across the tree of life get sick, not just us.

There's a tremendous amount of viral information in the environment, and there's a burgeoning field of trying to quantify that using complex tools.

So what are we trying to do?

We aim to track COVID-19 and other pathogenic outbreaks by looking for viral genetic information in the environment.

And there's already been some research about this.

I'm not an expert in this topic at all, but this became the focus of our group effort.

We narrowed it down a bit to using this publicly available genomic library.

So terabytes of data from genes sampled all over the world in all kinds of environments, thinking if we could develop a data pipeline that could look for the virus there in information that's already been compiled.

So this is another example of how DNA is ever-present, omnipresent in our environment, all living things, and non-living or semi-living viruses to shed DNA, shed records of their genetic code, and that's quantifiable.

So this shows ways in which DNA has already been analyzed for a lot of different complex problems.

So this is an example of an eDNA testing study that actually was done a couple months ago in Australia that was really able to track incidences of COVID-19 by sampling the viral load in the sewers.

So the idea is our people are being infected.

They're shedding the virus into the waste stream, into wastewater.

And untreated sewage has this footprint, this signal.

And so our group kind of was steered by this a little bit to think more broadly about ecological signals of the virus.

So when we were approaching this problem, we first conducted a literature review, and that's still very much in the beginning, thinking about

all of the computational tools available to look through large genetic libraries.

So sampling of genes to the environment, how people have looked at related that information to living communities, and then thinking about extrapolating those tools to the more specific problem of quantifying COVID outbreaks, looking for COVID-19 in the environment.

And then we thought about trial run of sort of the computational tool that would let us do that.

If we could develop a pipeline that could work with environmental DNA or viral RNA, we could test it on existing libraries and sort of figure out how to look for viruses in these existing databases and data sets.

And this would draw from a lot of expertise and a lot of resources.

So not to dwell too much on this topic, other stages of this process would be to reach out to stakeholders.

What knowledge gaps could the information generated by this process fill?

And then we thought about moving towards deliverables and funding structures.

So collaborators in the group really envisioned a scalable, decentralized, open source tool.

So that's if you have the minimum

viable tools to generate the bioinformatic information.

How am I on time?


SPEAKER_27:
You're totally fine, Gabe.

Continue.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

So...

I guess the deliverable could be a toolkit of bioinformatics and environmental DNA sampling that could be rapidly scalable and deployable in places that don't have a lot of the testing infrastructure present in the developed world.

So potentially a large implication or a large market for this

this technology if it gets developed.

So this is an example of the kind of information processing that people do with, it's called RNA-seq.

So looking at millions of fragments of genetic information

And this is looking at all the genes present in a bat guano.

And each of these pie charts, they discard most of the information, but then they can filter it down to a bunch of different viruses that were present and many of which had never been discovered before, present in bat guano.

And then they can relate this to species ranges and host interactions and extrapolate a huge amount of information about how the disease travels, where it travels,

where its reservoirs are from, they were looking at MERS among other viruses.

So this is kind of the computational tools we can start to wrap our minds around and play with.

And so these are the members of our group, came from a lot of different places, kind of a broad background in education levels and geographic location and our cultural backgrounds.

And

This is a very much early stage project.

I think we're very far from having a concrete deliverable or even knowing what it would look like to make it.

And I think the biggest thing we lack is the bioinformatics expertise.

So the real technical know-how to actualize the kind of environmental DNA detection or RNA detection pathway.

Additionally, if we did make it, it would be really computationally intensive.

So that's another constraint we'd have to work within.

We would need to find stakeholders, people who are looking at the knowledge gaps this project is targeting.

We also have to look for funding sources.

So if we want this to be a well-resourced undertaking, who is interested in the same things that we are?

What grants?

What deadlines?

How do we approach looking for money to do this project?

And so what do we want to accomplish?

So kind of to reiterate everything, we want to have an offering that really helps people.

It addresses needs that are presented by the current crisis.

This is also, you know, it's gathering information about where the disease is in the environment.

Updating our epidemiological information allows for improved forecasting and could save lives.

And then quoting Daniel flexible, modular, scalable pipeline.

So elements of a really distributed technology.

And we also want to learn new things and have fun and be supported to do this.

You know, we, people are, it's kind of naive to think people would be able to spend all their time working for no money.

So I guess this is thinking more deeply about the undertaking

and the kind of technological needs of the data pipeline there's generating this information and then also making sense of it so coupling this detection error proofing this detection path process and then also

coupling with a conceptual model that is validated in all the kind of interfaces between environment and molecular scales.

So also the next steps would be finding us perhaps an academic faculty sponsor that could provide more visibility to the project, identifying funding sources as had been described earlier.

project management.

So with the many moving parts and the many kind of subplots implied by all of these challenges, needing accountability for deadlines and triage around resource allocations, and also stewardship for the group process.

I think this was an interesting teamwork exercise because people were very asynchronous logging on and logging off at different times.

So understanding what the group could look like after it's brainstormed and working with these timeframes, that would be another, a lot of visioning to do.

And then also the reaching out to stakeholders as had been originally implied.

So conclusions are this is a complex problem.

We're still getting a sense of what we don't know.

We're exploring the knowledge landscape and brainstorming around problems that speak to us at this introductory level of analysis.

And many plot twists await.

So that is to say, we really have a lot to figure out.

So I'll open it up for questions.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_28:
Thank you, Gabe.

That was perfect.

It was 10 minutes exactly.

And it was an awesome project and presentation.

So you can leave the Jitsi.

And everybody is welcome to provide feedback via the Jamboard link.

These presentations have just been awesome.

So our next presenters.


SPEAKER_01:
Where is the Jamboard?


SPEAKER_28:
The link will be in general.

I'm going to kick you out now, Gabe.

All right.

Bye-bye.

It was like, I couldn't fire him.

He quit.

The next presenters will be coming from the Lean Food Supply Web Project and they'll have 10 minutes as soon as the screen share starts.

So take it away and I'll start your time once you start talking.


SPEAKER_27:
All right, we see your screen.


SPEAKER_10:
Are we good?


SPEAKER_28:
Can we see it?

Perfect.


SPEAKER_10:
All right.

I'm Jessica and Pavel is also joining us to answer any questions, but to make sure we don't hit technical issues, I'll do most of the speaking for the presentation.

We're wanting to look at the global food supply, what happened during the COVID-19 and what we can do to prevent that in the future.

So we saw these disturbances in the global food chain and it created a ton of waste.

And part of this is we've discovered there's issues and these very direct food chains and they create non-lean models.

And as you can see here, there's been milk dumped by dairy farmers.

A lot of vegetables have been dumped as well.

And we also look at food waste within our local communities through restaurants and whatnot.

So we're wanting to look and see if the food supply chain can be reinforced

with networks volunteers and cooperatives thus acting as a complex adaptive system and reducing this waste and uh can we analyze this based on the different geographical areas because we have a very diverse group very international group so what's happening in the united states may not be happening in other countries and that's going to be an issue trying to find the data access so

just to give you an idea this is our first real quick and dirty conceptual model uh so we have the idea that we're going to look at is let's say our perturbation hits our um our

Sorry, the sales directly from the farm, the processor, or the distributors.

So does this trigger a flow into an alternative distribution system that could be more efficient during these disturbances and create less waste?

So our goals are to address this for farmers, producers, consumers.

In these type of situations, that's when our entrepreneurs usually step in and our NGOs.

So we're wanting to research and prepare a report on the benchmarks to alter these existing supply chains, provide adaptive distribution systems to buffer these perturbations, and network and target the interested parties directly.

So we're envisioning this by creating a website and maybe eventually an app that lets voluntarily directly connect to these stakeholders.

In a way, it's kind of like Uber.

So Uber is great in places where maybe you want alternatives to set taxi services.

So we want Uber for farmers in the food supply chain.

So what we're going to need is we're going to need to understand the development of what happens to this production and supply inventories in real time.

So that way we know how to relocate

these resources during disturbances such as the pandemic.

We're going to need assistance on developing an app and the website.

And then there's connecting and pitching with others.

I believe it was Pavel, you connected with the Farm Link Project, a nonprofit organization, and then Food Finders, and then the Regional Effective Altruism Community.

we're we've got a workflow going uh we're hoping to see a mobile app and we would like to see a final paper modeling uh the traditional system and the alternative system that we're proposing so we're going to do this through bi-weekly meetings this is our partial team that we saw that we've been working on this and we have a very diverse team so it's

been interesting trying to work with a lot of people and have the different views.

We have modelers, but we also have people who are in creative design, food engineers.

So there's been a lot of interesting ideas presented to us.

And we're focusing mostly on dairy because that's been the one that's made the news a lot.

And it is very complex because dairy has to go through a lot of steps in its network.

Again, diverse group, we have very diverse contributions.

And we're already looking for external resources.

If someone says the USDA's got data, yo, they have a ton of data for the United States.

So if we're going to go internationally with this, we need to find data from other international sources as well, such as the United Nations and the World Bank.

So there we are.

I got a heart from JP.

That's great.

Any questions?


SPEAKER_28:
So a lot of the feedback from that excellent talk will be posted and visible in the Jamboard and people are always welcome to continue interacting with your whole team through Keybase.

My question would be what kinds of data are present or absent in USA and in other countries?


SPEAKER_10:
uh good question uh and pavel feel free to step in anytime if you have input so usda has a great amount of data on how much is produced and how much goes through processing and what hits the market so there's a ton of data on that available um there may be a little bit of uh

digging to find like how maybe feed supplies to livestock may affect that so we have to dig on that a little bit but uh usda has just got a ton on what's being transported per state and nationwide jp or sean any questions


SPEAKER_18:
I think in the interest of time, I'll put all my feedback in Jamboard, but that was awesome.

This is definitely for me, like the food supply chains are like what I was most concerned about.

And it's so nice to see you guys have addressed this kind of so well.


SPEAKER_28:
Is Ella the next presenter or has the next presenter not joined?

A question for you would be what new questions or perspectives on the supply chain arose just from the discussion with that team?


SPEAKER_10:
Well, what new questions arose?

Well, I'll be honest, there's been quite a few and my brain's a little lost.

Do you remember any, Pavel?


SPEAKER_17:
So we were discussing basically how to connect with the various stakeholders and discussing the particular structure of the foreseen community.

and how to really make this an efficient process.

So there are really a multitude of questions and we have a tremendous opportunity to proceed kind of globally because we have a global truly international team among the team members.

So I believe that

This project definitely holds a lot of promise, and I'm looking forward to working on this with everyone else on the team.


SPEAKER_28:
Awesome.

Thank you, Pavel.

Pavel and Jessica, you can leave the room.

Prahlad, we're ready for your presentation.

Is ELA on your team, or should I take the person out?


SPEAKER_08:
No, I don't believe so.

Hi.


SPEAKER_28:
All right, Prahlad, it's all you.

Once you start talking with the slides, I'll start the 10-minute timer.

The next group featuring Prahlad Menon as the presenter is related to the viability of online learning for frontline workers during COVID-19.

And the 10-minute time slot will begin once the slides are up.

Okay, Dan, can you see the slides?

I can see the slides, and then you could either hide that meet, and then it's good if you want to enable your picture-in-picture, or it's fine as it is.


SPEAKER_08:
How would I do that again?

Yeah, click the camera.

Okay, there we go.


SPEAKER_28:
And then full screen slides.


SPEAKER_08:
Okay, you can still see my screen, right?

It's kind of weird looking right now.


SPEAKER_28:
Yeah, we see it.


SPEAKER_08:
Okay, perfect.

OK, great.

So well, thanks for having us present this.

It was a wonderful opportunity to kind of be a facilitator, firstly, which was lots of fun, but also gather a group that addressed this problem of online learning as opposed to classroom-based education during this time of COVID-19.

So our topic kind of evolved, and I'll tell you a little bit about our journey and so on.

But overall, what we wanted to try to do was do a secondary study of the literature

to understand how viable online learning really is as opposed to classroom-based education of similar topics.

So clearly the COVID-19 pandemic has us rethinking traditional schooling and going and meeting people and doing things in this very traditional manner in classrooms and so on, whereas online approaches are an extremely interesting but untested, to some extent, alternative, especially for labs and

things like that.

I personally find that it works extremely well for my son, who's only four years old, but was recently diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder, although he's really flourishing with online learning as opposed to the classroom environment.

So clearly it makes a difference depending on the kind of end user.

But we wanted to explore this problem from the standpoint of

the material being taught and the audience or the level of the audience.

Right.

And so the meta analysis that we went about was to, you know, started with a review of credible literature, which was, which performed an actual randomized control trial relating to online versus traditional learning across different domains of

knowledge for different target audiences and for different target audience insurities, right?

And so we found literature relating to primarily nursing and medical learning because people from those backgrounds probably have the proclivity to actually publish this kind of work.

But we did find stuff relating to verbal skills and things like that as well.

But we kept things particularly suited to medical learning, particularly for nurses and physicians and physiotherapists and those kinds of professions.

So here's a persona to kind of humanize this whole discussion, right?

So Amy, let's say, is a nursing student and she is in her final year of her education.

and she really wants to try to help around in the hospital given the shortage of staff, shortage of beds, and so on, if she could actually feel confident about CPR and intubation, she could probably put somebody on a ventilator in the ER when the skill was required, right?

But the thing is, she knows how to do it, but she needs a little more training.

Can this training be offered using online education?

So that's the question we wanted to answer, right?

And so this was our approach.

So we did the Jamboard thing, came up with lots of different ideas, and eventually circled around the fact that we can't do any primary research in a short amount of time, so let's look at some secondary research.

And so these were the eight papers that we studied.

And then, I mean, in detail, we, of course, looked at many more, but these eight kind of made it into a meta-analysis.

And some of these papers involved many subgroups, right, which involved, in turn, different, you know, segregation by control and treatment groups based on online or traditional learning paradigms.

And so one example, let's say, this paper, there was this one paper which was about CPR training, right?

And so in CPR training, they said, hey, what if we did the

traditional AHA heart saver training, as opposed to the heart saver training offered via an online class, how well did people retain the CPR information immediately after the training and two months later?

And so we had something like that.

We would break that out into two studies, right?

One immediately after the training and 160 days after the training, and then come back with a comparison of the mean score that they got on some evaluation, let's say,

if they were in the treatment group, as opposed to the control group.

The treatment group being the people who had received the e-learning experience, right?

And we found a bunch of them.

Some of them were relating to nursing education.

Some of them were relating to achievement in terms of diabetes, best practices to avoid diabetic risks.

So one of the scores was a diabetes

attitude scale, and there were lots of interesting ones, right?

But all of them were centered around this idea of a zero to one standardized score with higher scores being that you learned better, right?

And so we wanted to see what's the overall effect size of this, the difference of means, let's say, between the scores of the frequent group, that means the people who received an e-learning as opposed to the typical control group, right?

This is what we found.

It seems like the e-learning group or online learning group on average did five percentage points better.

than the traditional classroom learning group.

And this is for subjects like CPR, intubation, therapy for individuals who require understanding of best practices to avoid diabetic risks and things like that, mostly attuned to the careers of a physician, medical professional, nurse, et cetera, right?

And so it seems like in this very preliminary study, there's statistical significance to show that you can be five percentage points better in terms of efficacy in learning as evidenced by the test scores, if that is an appropriate endpoint.

I mean, there could be others from the standpoint of validating our hypothesis to some extent that online learning might actually be a good idea for things that

are related to medical training.

Now, is this an encompassing study?

Probably not.

Are our few studies selected viable?

Yes.

I mean, most of them were inside the cone of our plot over here, right?

except for two outliers which tended to have smaller study sizes and effect sizes in general.

And so we want to try to expand this cohort and then publish a meta-analysis on the viability of online learning for trainings in regard to subjects that are benefiting medical professionals like Amy that you saw in our persona slide.

So, but for now it seems like things are looking fairly positive.

These are the two outlier studies that we had from our cone here.

So in the hackathon, we established a hypothesis, examined the literature, conducted a meta-analysis, and we tested the hypothesis that online learning works more effectively or as effectively as traditional learning paradigms.

But we do need to expand that into a larger range of topics in medicine and nursing in order to truly be publishable.


SPEAKER_28:
Prahlad, we just lost you for a second.

So I'll just pause the time.

It's totally all good.

If you can still hear me, you can reload your tab.

If you can't hear me, it's okay as well.

We'll just wait for you to figure it out.

Wow though.


SPEAKER_18:
JP, we've been misspelling here this whole time, by the way.


SPEAKER_19:
I've noticed, I've noticed.

You have.

Mine is here.

Okay, I thought we'd do it as meme virology.


SPEAKER_28:
I mean, doesn't it imply both?

Like, is this something you say?

It's like, I heard you.

I was right here.

I did it.


SPEAKER_18:
I was using JP's meaning the whole time.

That's what I meant.


SPEAKER_19:
It's our universal gesture of approval.

So the words, the actual spelling of the words we use doesn't matter.


SPEAKER_28:
I just kicked out a lot and the time is paused and people will certainly bear with us.

I'm just going to say, please rejoin.


SPEAKER_18:
I am so impressed by these presentations.

This is the coolest thing I've ever seen.


SPEAKER_19:
I was just doing fantastic work.

Wow.

I mean, very happy to see you.

And remember, Pilates is in what, Paris?

No, he's in Pittsburgh.

Oh, he's in Pittsburgh.


SPEAKER_28:
That's the meta research question.

Is there any correlation between distance and video lag?

welcome back palad um so you just were at um seven minutes eclipsed and so you have three minutes left which will restart as soon as you get everything working hey dan uh i think i'm back i think i'm back i joined from my phone but uh my computer is completely frozen where did you uh where did we where did things stop if you wouldn't mind telling me yes the stopping point was you just said the road map to publication is and just okay and then you can still see the slide

We can't see the slide right now, but the slide had the roadmap to publication.

So just give two more minutes on that.


SPEAKER_23:
Okay, fine.


SPEAKER_08:
That sounds perfect because my computer completely froze up, but that's okay.

So if you can still see the roadmap slide, really what we're trying to do now is to expand this, to prove this hypothesis out in a larger breadth of fields relating to medicine and nursing, right?

And then subsequently expand that outside of the medical literature or medical training fields

into areas that might be relating to K-8, K-12, undergraduate education and engineering, et cetera, to see if online learning and test scores that come pursuant to online learning of topics that are equivalent to those taught in the classroom are consistently leading to better performance numbers as a result of online learning relative to traditional methods, right?

And so the goal is peer-reviewed publication, of course, but the methods and so on that we adopted seem to be fairly solid, although we do need to broaden our base of literature.

So that's where we are.

I could probably wind up with that.

I really wish I could show the team slide up here.

Sean actually got it.

Sean is showing it, so we see the team.

Okay, wonderful, wonderful.

You see the team.

So that was our amazing team.

who kind of stuck through the end and we want to thank all the groups of advisors named on the slide over there because we wouldn't have been able to zero down into our topic and kind of really come up with something cohesive for us to work on without everybody's help.

So thank you so much.


SPEAKER_28:
Thank you, Prahlad.

That was really awesome.

Really great presentation.

And just with all the presentations, people are going to be providing feedback.

I'm going to kick you out, Prahlad.

People are going to be providing feedback in the Jamboard.

And we're seeing a lot of awesome interactions.

People are writing great and encouraging things and offering help across domains.

So thank you so much to Jim and to Sophia, who have joined from the Resilience Ontology Group.

Thank you to Sophia for being ready with your screen share.

And as soon as you start, I'll begin the 10 minutes.


SPEAKER_09:
Okay.

Can you hear me?


SPEAKER_27:
Good.


SPEAKER_09:
All right.

Great.

So I'm from the Resiliency Group.

And...

So we were grappling with the topic of resilience, which is one of the core complexity domains.

So just a brief introductions.

And partly one of our interests in resilience was that,

You know, there are many disciplines that talk about resilience and they don't always share the same language or they are talking about similar contexts with different language.

So one of our goals of our group was to try to

think about a framework where we could integrate this language.

So even within this simple figure, you can see there's this, what they call the engineering resilience concept, where you have like this well, and you have a ball, and if you perturb the ball, it ends up back in the state it was in before the perturbation, which is maybe a sort of general

definition of resilience is the capacity of a system to maintain a similar state in the face of perturbations.

And then the bottom figure below is you have this more ecological resilience concept, which has the same well and

You can also think of the depth of the well as the deeper the well, maybe the more resilient the system because it's harder to curb out of the state.

And then you hit this kind of threshold where you actually could end up in a different state.

So with that introduction, we first sort of thought about what is the problem.

So as I mentioned before,

So the biggest problem related to COVID is that it sort of illustrated gaps in resilience in our society on multiple dimensions.

know including the individual level you know the economic level within our health care system within our education system our food supply system so there are many dimensions of you know our systems that you know where resilience may have been deficient or where we were lacking resilience at the same time you know we have this um

issue with understanding resilience.

There's missing knowledge and understanding of the complex network character.

We're using different language.

Although we all sort of agree that COVID has illustrated some of the lack of resiliency of our system.

so our broad goal was sort of to say well we need to develop a framework for resilience that incorporates concepts across many different disciplines is multi-level to take into account you know that resilience can apply to the individual up to you know societal levels and then we thought that

we wanted a model that would maybe be a minimal to network analysis that could be used to identify points or no nodes of intervention for enhancing resilience.

So, um,

Then in terms of some of the products that we discussed was perhaps first developing an open platform for discussion and interaction, because this is a broad topic that would benefit from the input of multiple people and disciplines to create perhaps an ontology of resilience that could help address some of this conflicting language and give us a better handle on the language of resilience and

perhaps a paper output of our work.

So when we sat down to sort of

think about resilience as a network problem.

We looked at the person and relationship with other people, a family unit and their work and income and their health and medical services and employment.

And we also thought about all the environmental factors that can affect an individual's resilience, the environment, pollution, community supports or workplace, the societal infrastructure.

schools.

And then we also thought about how are we going to analyze this network, understanding the connections between nodes, the meaning and implications of the connections, and tasks like robustness of the network to node removal or disturbance.

So our team

There were, we have four people on our team.

Unfortunately, one of our people couldn't connect, but the three of us come from different backgrounds from population health, computer science, community economic development, government policy.

And so we've set up a schedule for collaborating of one hour, two times a month with a progress report after two more meetings in one month.

So and then we thought broadly about what kind of assistance would we need in such a project?

And, you know, and so we talked about whether, you know,

in order to tackle this sort of disciplinary language issue that maybe somebody from natural language processing or there, you know, there's a computer scientist that deal with sort of reading the literature and database construction to sort of

tackle this literature of resilience and build a database of resilience terminology.

You know, there's an aspect of network analysis.

And then we would want input from domain experts in other disciplines, healthcare workers, engineer system analysts.

And if we want to have some kind of way to get input from multiple people,

who are interested in the topic of resilience, who might want to input into our models or development of our framework, there needs to be maybe not listed somehow a kind of people with knowledge of creating like a web-based platform or a platform for doing this.

And I think that is actually my last slide.

And so I'm happy to open it up to questions, comments, suggestions.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_28:
Thank you for that awesome presentation.

There's three minutes left in the time interval.

So either Tomas or Jim, just coming from different perspectives, what was it like working on this team or how did it evolve your understanding of resilience or ontologies?


SPEAKER_14:
Yeah.

So this is Jim.

Can you hear me?

Yeah, I, it was very interesting for me because I came in with some preconceptions and we also realized this was just three of us that came up with this idea.

fairly late last night.

And in terms of me, we jumped on this morning without a clear problem statement.

And while it doesn't look great, we actually made some great progress.

And let me just say from the background, so I'm the one who works in economic and community development.

And resilience is a buzzword there.

Everyone's saying, we've got to be more resilient.

Well, what it means to different people

it means many different things to different people.

And in economics, it could simply mean opening the economy back up.

That's being resilient to others that are looking for everything from personal health right up through community health.

So we thought that a better understanding of this was needed for policymakers at all different levels.


SPEAKER_28:
Very nice, Tomas.

Do you want to add anything there?


SPEAKER_00:
I think it's an important issue to establish, I would call it interoperability, to exchange the different knowledge issues and come together to model the problem of resilience.

Because we have different domains and it seems that they talk nearby about the same thing, but there are slight differences.

And these differences are reason for misunderstanding.

And we cannot exchange data as well as the knowledge.

And that's why we need something like a framework to come together and define concepts and the relationship between the concepts to understand what is a interesting issue in this domain.

And maybe we can adapt the idea to the other domain and analyze this in the different contexts.


SPEAKER_19:
Yeah, I very much appreciate all of your efforts on this.

I think it's, you know, if it continues forward as a project working group, there'll be a lot of growth and a lot of those lateral connections that make with each other.

So very impressive.


SPEAKER_28:
Okay, thank you very much.

And as with the other groups, there's awesome feedback forming on the Jamboard.

And what's great is these links and especially the final project presentation links are staying live.

So Keybase is going to be open for you and these Jamboards are open.

So the three from this Resilience Ontology group, you can close your Jitsi window.

Thank you for presenting.

All right.

So our next group is going to be our COVID impacts mental health group.

And this is Eddie, who's going to be presenting.

And so Eddie, thanks for being set up and perfect picture in picture.

The floor is yours.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.

Thank you, everybody, and good afternoon.

Thank you for your patience for going all the way to the very last presentation.

We are COVID Impacts Mental Health, and we have an international multidisciplinary panel that we'd love to share with you.

We have people who have experiences from a variety of disciplines, including education policy, technical engineering management, neuroscience, and academia.

Our group was inspired by Jason's talk, where he had a very expressive, vulnerable, and a very vital conversation that all of us, I think, need to digest a little bit more clearly, which is related to mental health, anxiety, and how all of our lives are affected.

When we first started discussing in our forum, we spent about three or four hours just looking at different data sets,

reading about different anecdotes about people's lives and trying to understand the lived experience during COVID-19.

For certain elements, we see certain things that are very obvious, like seeing a shortage of supplies at a supermarket.

But one of the things that we did discuss too is that whether it be East or West, there are certainly cultural elements that provide us with greater strength in times of adversity.

One example that we gave as an example is whether it be in Madrid or Singapore,

We see systems where there are frameworks where, as an example, adult children tend to live at home in a multi-generational household.

One of the elements that I live streaming.


SPEAKER_28:
All right.

Excellent.

Please continue.

Thanks.

And sorry about the glitch.


SPEAKER_03:
Sure.

No worries.

So what we like to emphasize here is that if you look at the top right corner,

Really, with COVID, it's a bunch of small, tiny little inputs, little perturbations and little disturbances here and there.

But in aggregate, we all may find ourselves in a situation where we fall apart.

And in certain cases, this affects our more concrete aspects of our lives, such as our finances.

What we'd like to emphasize as well is that with COVID-19, it really changes, if you will, the circle.

So one of the things that we discussed is how the circle of influence, if you will, continues to shrink and shrink with a hyper shrinkage, almost the resignation with post COVID, where with a very small group of people, you have fewer people to depend on and more people have to take greater responsibilities.

As we spent these few hours trying to examine all of the data, we were parsing through a variety of different surveys.

And one of the things that I think challenges us as a community is being able to get sufficient and appropriate information.

One of the things we do understand is that depending on what surveys are utilized and also just depending on human psychology, the results of a survey don't always reflect lived experience.

So with this dark web, if you will, the image on the bottom left, what we like to emphasize is that to really meet our goals, we need to be able to use a variety of secondary statistical indicators to be able to track elements of our economy, people's emotions, what they post, the way that they spend money.

What we'd like to emphasize is that a lot of the stressors are really present and have been present as a result of a variety of structural issues that we've seen before the crisis.

If you look at the top left corner, we see a telephone with, well, an iPhone with a bunch of notifications.

And honestly, there are a lot of people who have challenges contending with this, for lack of better words, shit ton of notifications.

But what we also see is that with COVID-19, we're then faced with the greater brunt of handling more responsibilities at the same time.

And for challenges that we've already known before, like being able to create a more equitable work life and an equitable arrangement with childcare, especially with gender norms, this has really been put up to the forefront for all of us.

We'd like to present a solution, and with COVID Impacts Mental Health, we like to look at it in three prongs of empowerment.

The first is with the individual, having, for example, instructional courses, having webinars, and being able to provide people with the resources to be stronger advocates for themselves.

In terms of teams, we'd like to foster a more appropriate and a stronger working environment.

For example, if you look at Glassdoor or LinkedIn, we can see a lot of statistics regarding income, the number of employees at a company, but what we don't have is an appropriate key performance indicator or perhaps several key performance indicators

to be able to evaluate mental health on a broader scale and to be able to allow people to independently make better decisions and also encourage corporations to be on this mission with us.

The last piece is policy and this is actually at the Davos Forum in 2018 where incidentally it actually says toward a better capitalism.

dead center.

So what we'd like to emphasize is that we've had this discussion about, you know, economy versus health.

But the truth is that it's not really a dichotomy between the two.

We're looking for a symbiotic relationship between health, mental health, and economy.

One of the things I'd like to emphasize as well is that there are definitely think tanks like the Cato Institute and the Heritage Foundation, but we really want to push things to the next paradigm.

We'd like to call ourselves the think-do tank, where we'd like to be able to have a more aggressive engagement with policyholders and be able to talk about affecting more substantial changes.

If we look at Amsterdam as one example, it's an ecosystem where 30 or 40 or 50 years ago, there was a greater emphasis on car travel.

And I think that it's a false mission for people to, on an individualistic level, necessarily solve the social problems that we have.

We need to do things on a broader scale as well as on a micro scale.

So the issue that we had with our team is that there's obviously a lot of variables, a lot of discussions, and a lot of different cultural models that we need to be able to examine.

And really, there's a far greater level of further research and supplemental development that we'll need.

So we'd like to encourage people to further this conversation with us at COVID Impacts Mental Health.

You can see our link over there, as well as all of our usernames.


SPEAKER_28:
Awesome.

Thank you so much for that presentation.

JP or Sean, any questions first?


SPEAKER_19:
Take it away.

No, I think it's not so much questions.

I'm just very...

understanding and appreciative of the work, I think, across the board.

This is the, you know, we're used to dealing with fuzzy spaces in complexity all the time, and this is probably the fuzziest, which is the human brain and kind of how, not our base biology, but kind of our base being impacts things.

So thank you, you know, thanks again very much for, you know, the rest of the team for taking on this as a challenge.

I mean, this is,

This is the one, right?

I mean, it all boils down to human happiness.

So I'm most impressed you guys are taking a stand out.


SPEAKER_18:
I loved the screenshot of Carlos Gershenson's keynote from Friday where his kid walked in and was like, ooh, in front of the camera.

So funny.


SPEAKER_28:
My question for Eddie or Justine or Sasha would be going forward, how does complexity inform the approach and how do you respect just the range of health and mental health across life stages and across areas while also promoting good habits and health overall?


SPEAKER_03:
Justine, I saw your nod.

Do you want to take that question?


SPEAKER_11:
Sure.

One thing we talked about a lot was the happiness index versus the GDP.

So we really want we really think that there's a measure of success out there that people could be utilizing more.

And it's, of course, going to be very complex, which is why it's a great topic for complexity sciences.

There's economic factors, there's physical health related factors.

There's just so much that goes into mental health.

So we really hope to create an even more diverse team.

to continue these discussions and make sure all of these factors are incorporated in a way that's easy to communicate and effective.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, and I would like to add that we really want to empower individuals as well as small teams and working outward from that to

value their family and kin and to kind of bring that with them as they go through their life and work and kind of instead of feeling that we have to choose one over the other to figure out what is the appropriate and best balance for each person, because clearly that will look very different across cultures and ages and family situations.

but to really bring back the emphasis on the colliding worlds that we're seeing now.


SPEAKER_28:
All right.

Thank you so much for this presentation.

These seven presentations have truly been excellent.

Thank you everyone for participating.

And this is just the tip of the iceberg.

We know there's other teams that formed and other connections that were made.

And it's also not just the tip of the iceberg.

It's the beginning of a long road towards actually making the kinds of impacts and seeing the kinds of like changes

and meta changes that we all want to see.

So Eddie and Justine, you can hop out of the Jitsi and we will see you on Cubase.

Thank you for the presentation.

That was awesome.

Wow.

Sean and JP, here we are.

As if it were Friday night.

As if it were Friday night.

Just again, thank you so much to our facilitators and our attendees for really making it happen.

Of course, we were just chilling and on a live stream.

It wasn't us who did these projects.

It was all the work in the details and in the conceptual stages.

Sean, maybe do you want to share the final presentation?

And we'll move into the closing section of our entire Complexity Weekend.


SPEAKER_19:
come together at the end of this thing.

I mean, you know, the connections we made, the community, this building, you know, the shared act of creating together.

I think that's a really, really, you know, important and powerful place to be.

We have this discussion.

One of the things we start off with is like, how do we feel empowered?

And, you know, this should make people feel really empowered, you know, come together, you know,

you know, random threads interact with each other and become, become something, get something on the board.

And here we are together.


SPEAKER_18:
I think something that we learned from this weekend is also just how critical a curious mindset is to this whole process.

Cause it's some of the teams, it's amazing how diverse the different perspectives were.

And it's so valuable if you get past some of the boundaries that prevent people from interacting across disciplines like that.

And that curious mindset just really puts everyone in a good place.

where they can really approach people with kindness.

If there's confusion initially, like there's all this great stuff that comes from just having that beginner's mindset and, and, and approaching things that way.

It was awesome.


SPEAKER_19:
Yeah.

One of the things I appreciate most is like people's willingness to work with each other.

And, you know, even, even if, um,

You know, the statement was like, oh, this is not Paula's show.

This is not something.

I mean, those are the times where you learn the most is when your brain is working hardest and you don't understand how things are and you don't understand where the way forward is and you don't have a complete and total, like, here's what we're doing.

Not to assign value to either one, right?

But everything that I've seen and everything that's going on is just absolute gold in terms of just project generation and teamwork and, you know,

all the help things for community.


SPEAKER_18:
Yeah, these projects would not come out of traditional institutions because they're so subdivided by discipline that it's just to get this cross chatter, it's not the place for it.

And I think we're all collectively helping to build that place for it.

And that is really cool to watch.

Nice.

All right, let's get into slide deck and then we will send everyone off.

I'm sure a lot of people are tired.

So, uh, I just wanted to say thank you.

Last time to Michael Garfield, who supplied some awesome music.

If you guys liked that music at the beginning of, uh, before all the welcome decks and when we welcomed everyone back, uh, it was really cool complexity inspired music, which is cool.

You can look in the random, I posted about it a while ago.

I'll post again, but that's smart.

You're I'll go check it out.

Um, yeah, so we did it.

We did it.

That was like pretty intense maybe for a lot of people, but also, uh, you know, it's probably made people.

I'm a little uncomfortable getting up, you know, into a live stream and all this cool stuff people maybe not, maybe not having done before.

Um, but I hope you come out of it feeling empowered and actually you have all these tools, you know, now you're, you're basically, uh, a lot of the teams for people just watching a live stream.

Um, we were using key base as the backend for the whole conference, um, and Jitsi for video conferencing and just various tools.

And, uh, when we had the teams registered, they had to create their own key base and use Jitsi within their own team.

And so basically by the end of this hackathon.

they know all of the tooling that we've been using for the conference.

And it's kind of like a mitosis event where you just get, boom, you know, a couple more cells now.

And then, you know, so that was really cool to watch.

And it's all going to continue.

You know, this key base for this cohort of the conference isn't going away.

So if anyone wants to still join a team, post in there.

We'll try to make it happen.

You know, we'll see.

But for this particular adventure for this weekend, we are coming to the end.

Just some of the results, and this is really the tip of the iceberg like Dan was saying.

We had seven teams that presented.

There's teams that I know of that are not on our radar.

Again, the unique thing about organizing this is that we actually weren't able to see a lot of the information of the teams working and whatnot.

That's why we were also blown away by the presentations because they were like, I didn't even know anything.

We didn't really know what happened.

It's just so cool to see it all.

Can someone explain the meta team?


SPEAKER_19:
Yeah, so there was a team that was a data team that was willing to assist other teams to get the data done.

And I thought that was fantastic because there was nothing in the rules that said you could do that, but nothing that said you couldn't.

So to see a team pop up that's like, anybody need help?

I thought it was great.


SPEAKER_18:
That was aliasweb, E-L-I-A-S-W-E-H-B-E, at aliasweb.

Keybase that is, yeah, they've really helped with the backend on the data integration, which is really cool.

Uh, and also I hope we've made some friendships, some simple ongoing collaborations.

You're now in a community of practice.

So, uh, we are all just going to keep doing cool things together, whether it's the project we started during the weekend or whether it's new projects we're going to create together in the future.

And then we have all these great artifacts that came out of it, which is, I love all the Jamboard boards that was not planned.

It's just people, I guess, like the tool, so they all used it.

I'm pretty sure every single team used it, which is interesting.

Take this away, JP.

What do you want to share here?


SPEAKER_19:
Just a couple of examples of artifacts.

These popped up in the art channel.

I thought they were... This is...

This is Stephanie heckman, right?


SPEAKER_18:
Oh, yeah, sorry.


SPEAKER_19:
Let me hear from You know, I thought it was you know, just this the artifacts were generating here.

It's fantastic in the next the next slide as well Yeah, let me show that one I'm gonna actually take my Yeah Couple of things that did not exist prior to part of this weekend here.

We are so I

They're in the key base if you want to check them out.

You have to forgive me for just grabbing these, but I thought they were totally inspired.

Totally.


SPEAKER_18:
I learned so much about visual facilitation.

I didn't even know about before the conference that this concept of synthesizing information collectively into visual patterns, and that captures the proceedings, but also a synthesis of the information shared.

I didn't even know about that before this.


SPEAKER_19:
Yeah, and this would say nothing about the Jamboard stuff that came together with truly collaborative efforts.

Totally.


SPEAKER_18:
It is truly an emergent phenomenon because the interactions provide new information that you did not have before, and that's really cool.


SPEAKER_28:
I'd like to take this time just to go back to the Jamboard just briefly.

You can leave your screen up as it is.

I just want to read one anonymous beneficial comment about each of these presentations.

There's so many more things we could say about these presentations, but I'm just going to go through each one and just say one thing that really stood out.

So for the COVID-19 public policy group, people thought there was an excellent network diagram and that there was enormous amount of teamwork displayed under time constraints.

On the COVID information transmission, people pointed out that there were clear frameworks and that the potential model was also very clearly laid out, which is so important for the beginning of a complex project.

For the sick bugs project, people wrote that it was fascinating and they had never heard or thought of this using the ecological signals in that way.

For the lean food supply, people really seem to like the system flow diagram and other people pointed out that it was one of the most important problems related to COVID.

For the fifth team, the viability of online learning for frontline workers during COVID, people thought that it was a essential question that was also well-framed and had a great focus on making an immediate impact

For the sixth project, the resilience ontology, some of the nice comments were that there was a very nice timeline laid out and that their points about how language matters and then they delved into the actual details were also very valuable.

And then that seventh and final presentation on COVID impacting mental health,

people pointed out that there was a great origin story for the team and that it had very insightful points to be made about policy, economy, health, and the scale of action.

There's more to read in those Jamboards and also there's more to add in those Jamboards.

People who are watching this on replay can actually go back to the Jamboard and add more.

It's alive and that was just to give a few nice things about each of these teams because they were really also excellent presentations.


SPEAKER_19:
I'll give that a great spell here.

I'm going to give it all of the emojis I have.


SPEAKER_18:
Fantastic.


SPEAKER_19:
Very good.


SPEAKER_18:
I definitely, actually, Dan, do you want to speak to next steps as far as the conference and just the organization?

JP, how about you start off?


SPEAKER_19:
Yeah, so this is going forward in a couple of next steps.

The graph depicts, I'll get to that in the next minute.

The graph is learning.

So we have our first experience here.

And we'll go through some renewal processes.

And you always have your communication channels available to you.

So your key-based channels, the one you've been using this weekend will remain live and remain yours from now until forever, complex weekend, May 2020.

You are now all, congratulations, you've made it through.

Here we are on the other side.

So we now have a Complex Weekend alumni channel that you can be a part of that, you know, basically what we're doing, if you want to know the secret sauce to what we're doing on the back end here, you have your in-group and you have your group that you're a part of.

Then you have the group of veterans that have gone through the same experience with you in their own different ways.

And then, of course, Complex Weekend public for those in the public who are interested in Complex Weekend, so.

That's what's going on.

The next slide.


SPEAKER_18:
Actually, I want to stop you just because I want to let people know, on Keybase, you can just search these team names and add yourself.

We're going to invite everyone into the alumni one and the public one.

Anyone out there who's maybe watching and wasn't participating in May 2020, you can just search for .public and we'll add you in basically.


SPEAKER_28:
Yeah.

Just to clarify one more time on this way that we're going to communicate going forward, because we're not going to send you e-mails until maybe another call for another event.

But follow up, we're not going to send e-mails.

May 2020, complexweekend.may2020 will always be just this group of people.

That's the attendees and the facilitators.

Nobody else will ever be added to this team.

Complexweekend.alumni will be accumulating alumni pool with all people from different cohorts.

And then complexweekend.public will be like, if you have a friend and they're really interested,

get them on Keybase, have them join Complex Weekend Not Public, and then they'll be right and ready to respond when we announce a call for another event like this.


SPEAKER_18:
Yes.

And one thing I also want to mention is that, you know, this is an annual event series, but we are working on trying to get a more frequent set of events happening throughout the year too.

So we do want to, at the very least, connect with everyone in a week and connect with everyone in a month.

and really just keep track of what everyone's doing, how's your project going, keep that retention of the learning, like you're seeing on the curve here, and hopefully we can get to a monthly series or something eventually, and that's kind of our goal.

Let me get to the next slide.

There you are.


SPEAKER_19:
JP, you wanna talk about?

Yeah, so this is for our,

Our benefit, well, your benefit, our benefit, everyone's benefit.

Give us all the feedback you possibly can.

Let us know how we did, what you enjoyed, what can be improved, and most importantly of all, let us know if you want to be involved.

I mean, this is a...

I'm not a fan of hierarchies because it's a community of practice and we're all here together.

If you want to be involved as a facilitator, if you want to be involved with the community, if you want to be involved, however you would like to see your role in Complexity Weekend go forward.

We have an email out there for you.

You can contact us on Keybase via a private message.

or send out actually an anonymous feedback form at the end of the program once we have a couple minutes to catch our breath and get that out to you.

This is very, very important for us.

Critical.

Critical.

So even to those who may not be with us anymore, that information is valuable too.

So if you came in with a friend or if you know somebody

either online or in person who may have done this program with you, encourage them to write us feedback at any and all levels possible.

Yeah, absolutely.


SPEAKER_28:
Just to reiterate, complexweekend.gmail.com is where if anyone is interested, they can always reach out for more information.

Complexity team is our key base username that's shared amongst the organizer team.

And then we're also going to post just an anonymous feedback form in case people want to also provide anonymous comments at any time.

And really anything you can do to help any thought that you had about could they have done it better?

We had many such thoughts along the way, but we only have our perspectives.

So getting everyone's perspectives on how we could improve would make it improve just that much more.

And especially that last point about letting us know if you want to get involved.

It's kind of like a step up slash step in model.

If somebody who was an attendee this year wants to just do something more, they want to help in some way, just stay with that emotion of wanting to help reach out.

And then let's find a role where you can contribute in your own way, whatever your, whatever your experience is, whatever anything is just come talk to us.

If you're listening to this live stream, you're basically ready to help other people become in your position as well.

So get involved and we really look forward to working with a lot of you in the coming years.


SPEAKER_18:
Totally.

That's a great way to end it.

I think, why don't we open it up to general questions basically, right?

Is that what you want to do?

Let's go to the last slide.

Oh, there it is.


SPEAKER_28:
We really appreciate the attendees who set aside time, especially bizarre times, depending on their time zone, to the facilitators who bear with us and also made time out of their schedules and just brought such an amazing kaleidoscope of advanced perspectives to the table.

And every presentation I saw, it felt accessible.

It felt timely.

It felt like something that I wouldn't have heard at any other conference, let alone the combination.

Just everybody was a participant here.

And that's why it was such a special thing.

So really, everyone is welcome to participate in this community.


SPEAKER_19:
Extra shout outs to our facilitators are just amazing people.

I want to thank each and every one of them individually when I can.

But for now, I'll

by just expressing how much admiration for everyone who stepped to the plate, as well as attendees.

I'm trying to think that it's a tentful thing where without facilitators, we couldn't make it happen.

Without people joining, we couldn't make it happen.

I mean, just everybody is an incredible part of this community.

Thank you all very, very much.


SPEAKER_18:
Yeah.

Thanks for your courage.

It's it's it's, you know, it takes a lot of courage to go in, especially the 37% of our initial registration crowd.

that were new to complexity.

I mean, that can be intimidating, especially with the first introductions and key base are like, I go to a complexity, like, you know, graduate school program.

Like, oh shit, what did I get into?

But it's like, you know, that courage to step in and have that beginner's mindset and participate in a team with a lot of backgrounds or people with a lot of backgrounds and perspectives that you're not used to, all that takes courage.

And you should be very proud of yourself for getting to this end of this whole experience.

And I hope you feel better for it.

and that you come back and that you're in this community of practice and that we'll see you around basically.


SPEAKER_28:
So I posted in general, if anyone had any last questions and if anything comes in the next few seconds, Jen writes, thank you organizer team in all caps.

Thank you, Jen.

Thank you, JP and Sean.

It was really amazing to work with you really over the past years.

JP, we've been working in some sense since 2015 and Sean also several years since back in the early complexity days.

And to just be able to grow as a team and to work with you has been just more than an honor.


SPEAKER_19:
Oh, thanks, guys.

Yeah, thank you both for bringing me on to your project, your complexity project.


SPEAKER_18:
It's our project, but this whole thing is a network of agents and everyone...

The participants and facilitators, we're all collectively making it happen.

And it's just amazing.


SPEAKER_19:
For anyone else, like I've been alluding to, this is our project, really.

If anybody's out there and wants to do something in the future, let us know.

Let us know how we can help.

Let us know.

The Complexity community is just this incredible set of people.

And if there's any kind of inspiration you feel to put something together, reach out, and we'll make it happen.

So hold on a little bit.


SPEAKER_18:
all right let's see some comments real quick dan let's see so we see thank you as a team thanks so much memorable experience pop it in i can see it live so let's see what you got to say let's just give them like a minute or two just to talk to each other really thank you all uh rj said thank you all availability doesn't end after this weekend never hesitate to reach out always looking for ways to help the cw clan love it purple heart emoji meme has caught on


SPEAKER_28:
And just to give a few ideas of the dimensions that we want to take moving forward, at least the areas we want to explore would be a shorter format event, because we know that it's just simply a barrier to participation for many, especially if we ask for a long block of commitment ahead of time.

So we want to think about shorter time experiences.

We want to think about longer time experiences, and then we want to think about how community is what bridges the gap from the short experiences where it feels like you could have talked for hours more, and the long experiences that are very hard to allocate time for, the answer is the community.

One other dimension is

from the introduction to the complexity community and introduction to complexity science to the most advanced and cutting edge research, the kinds of groups that form around a topic and realize that potentially no one else in the world has ever asked these kinds of questions or taken that kind of approach.

And so it's not just about stratifying events and making an intro event in an upper level event.

It's about maintaining the tension that's dynamic where we're keeping both of those perspectives in mind for the same event.

And so we really appreciate people's feedback who are beginners, especially because they're the ones who guide us in how to design these events.


SPEAKER_18:
Awesome stuff.

All right.

What do you say?


SPEAKER_28:
You ready to call it?

I think I'm ready to call it.

All right.

Live stream off.

Keybase till the end.

We'll see you there.

We'll see you all.

We'll see you all.