SPEAKER_01:
All right, everyone, thanks so much for tuning in to Complexity Weekend.

Whether you're watching it live or in replay, this is our third live stream.

It's Saturday afternoon, evening for me, but it's probably a different time for you, and that's okay because we're a global community of practice.

We're going to have about a 25 minute tune by one of our awesome facilitators, Michael Garfield.

And after that, we're going to see you right back here at this live stream where we're going to be going through a jam board and we're going to be focused on team formation.

It's going to be a great time.

So we hope that you're around in just a few minutes.

Enjoy the groovy sounds of Michael Garfield.

I know I will.

And I'll see you in 25 minutes with a few other organizers and facilitators.

So enjoy the music.

See you soon.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh.

Woo-hoo!


UNKNOWN:
Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.


UNKNOWN:
So,

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
All right.

Hello and welcome everyone.

We are back.

We're live with the Saturday night, at least where I am, live stream and probably a different time for you.

And that's great.

I'm here with Sean and Jen.

So maybe facilitator Jen, why don't you introduce yourself while we get started and then we'll kick right off with the rest of the live stream.

So hello, Jen.


SPEAKER_03:
Hey, first of all, great to see you guys and kind of interact.

I've

I feel like it's been a while since we've been interacting in this virtual, like, but live space.

I've actually been having a great weekend so far and I hope everyone else is too.

I feel like that's like a corny thing to say, but it's totally true.

So who am I?

So I'm Dr. Jen Hough.

I have a doctorate in anthropology.

I specialize in archeology, particularly deep time questions.

You know, what does it mean to be human?

Well, what does it mean to not be human?

How can we use technology in archaeology to understand that barrier and to better understand ourselves?

Kind of technology change over long periods of time, human landscape, human environment interactions.

And more recently, pre-pandemic, it was thinking about social networks, exchange networks,

as a way to manage risk, but then the pandemic came around and I'm like, or a source of risk.

So that's kind of like some of the outside of Complexity Weekend stuff I think about.

I'm teaching at UW right now.

And so yeah, that's kind of what I've been up to lately.


SPEAKER_01:
I have some questions for you right off the bat, Jen, but maybe Sean, maybe say hello.


SPEAKER_02:
Hi, I'm Sean.

You've probably seen me in Gather.


SPEAKER_01:
Hi, I'm Sean.

You've seen me in Gather.

Jen, technology.

Are we leaving a physical footprint with these digital meetings?

How is the online first space for meetings changing our signature through deep time?


SPEAKER_03:
So, you know,

And also, you know, being embedded with Legend of Gather, I tend to think about how we're embodied in these spaces.

So like how these spaces come back into the world that we're in.

First of all, we're spending a lot less money and a lot less petrochemicals on flying to places.

And eating out, well, the downside or the upside is we're not eating out in restaurants, depending on where you are in that little complex environment of meeting spaces and conference hotels.

So I think we have a much, much smaller carbon footprint doing this.

And I think it creates huge opportunities for

you know, inclusiveness and being able to communicate, you know, because just, you know, I finished my PhD, but, you know, as a graduate student, there's a lot of expectations to go to meetings and not a lot of funds to help you get there.

And so it can be like a real barrier.

And so I think that I, overall, I think we're doing really well.

I'd say the downside is because we are human beings and we live in our bodies, right?

And so we don't get

For better or for worse, we don't get each other's pheromones.

Anybody who's been late on a Saturday at a conference knows that they wish they had a little fewer pheromones going on as everybody's been meeting all day long and rushing from one room to another and heading out for beers and so forth.

It can get a little robust, very human going on there.

But it is a feedback mechanism that we don't really think about so much.

When you're standing...

in front of a classroom or standing in front of a lecture hall or having a conversation.

But I got to say, like, you know, I was just over in the cafe, like sitting on a couch with a bunch of people that I've met at previous Complexity Weekends or know from elsewhere.

And that really felt like, you know, we're getting that conference-y, like having these informal conversations going like, oh, that group of people looks interesting.

I'm going to go eavesdrop and then wind into the conversation.

So I don't know.

of all over the place so um yeah i think i think ecologically you know in our carbon footprint that we're doing a lot better there's stuff i miss but i think it's a great event thanks for sharing that jen sean


SPEAKER_02:
I'm just thinking of, like, the thing that keeps striking me with this whole Gather experience is how interesting it is that we're just changing a few pixels by making it a couch or, you know, moving something slightly to the left or whatever.

But there's huge psychological differences with just a few pixels can make.

And it's just so fascinating to me, kind of having worked with the Gather committee,

and really kind of built out a new space for this cohort, how much goes into, how much thinking kind of goes into this space that ultimately everyone inhabits and it affects so much about all the interactions, but ultimately it's just pixels, but yet it's so important to us how it looks in the aesthetic and how you embody it, yourself in it.


SPEAKER_03:
I mean, that would be like- Yeah, just having like a rectangle, oops, sorry.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, it'd be like looking at a totem pole or another artifact saying, well, that's carbon.

It is at the atomistic level, at the reductionist level.

Yes, it's pixels, it's bits.

But what do we use that technology for connecting and for doing things?

So it's more than that.

Yeah.

What were you going to say there?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, that's along the same lines.

It's like, you know, you could just have rectangles of different sizes that are private speaking areas.

But like, I love, and I love like the ideas of the furniture, like that there's different styles of couches and there's a little like kind of Victorian Edwardian looking chairs that are a little fussy looking that are facing each other and how we use these symbols to kind of spark what sort of interactions we're supposed to be having and

And they kind of create, I mean, they also limit, you know, like, but that's like the rules of chess.

Like, it creates, the rules create opportunity for infinitely creative play.

So, yeah, so it kind of, like, sparks this, like, this is where I sit and have, like, an earnest conversation with someone.

And, you know, this is where we all sit around the couch and just kind of BS and stuff like that.

So I just...

been blown away.

Like I, I toured the gather space a couple of times before this weekend, just to orient myself.

Cause I always find that that's like a spot where I'm like, like immediately like, who am I?

Where am I?

What am I doing?

And then if I ease myself in, I might save myself a little anxiety on that front.

And I think, I think it worked, but I was just like, Oh my God, this is amazing.

So I really love all the thought.

And I think it's working.

I don't know.

I mean, there's nothing perfect, and I'm sure we'll always change and iterate, but I think this is a great direction that we're heading in.


SPEAKER_01:
It's definitely... Yeah, go ahead, John.

Oh, no, I was just going to say...


SPEAKER_02:
Infinite passing.

It's like passing.

I was just going to say, one thing I always notice when people first get into Gather, because usually it's me or someone else there is like, hi.

I go right up to them, like, hello.

And at first, they're like, ah.

I didn't realize I was going to immediately be able to interact with people.

But then as soon as they have that reaction, then a spark enters their eyes.

And they're like, what is this?

And it's just this.

This realm, by just giving a little bit of control with the arrow keys, it's so much better than Zoom.

It's something where you just feel drained by Zoom.

But Gather is just like, it's exciting.

I want to just stay in it.

And I've been in it for hours and hours and it's energizing.


SPEAKER_01:
Just a few comments from the chat.

John wrote, maybe we should all arrive on a red carpet or red heart and have our friends there to greet us.

And it's something we've talked about with the welcoming committee.

And it's something you can't do when you don't have the spatial chat.

We want to have it set up so that each person on their first entrance to gather, their first hello to the community, there's a human there to greet them.

Not just a shape, not just a to-do list, but a real person who's there to take as long as it takes.

requires to figure out your audio figure out your visual figure out what you're here to do that's really special and then also stephen um wrote it's funny how putting some impassable squares over objects and gather makes them have a sense of substance especially when on a mission to another room and so it's kind of like when you're trying to get to another space and you're getting blocked by a podium or getting blocked by a chair

that's the challenge that makes the difference that's the fun that we get to have when we're navigating obstacles it's sometimes you need to take a step to the side you need to use lateral thinking to get around the roadblocks in conventional thinking so it's a awesome spatial metaphor for a lot of things that we explore in complexity and yeah big shout out to stephen sean you know everyone else on the gather committee surely thank you

Yes.

Awesome work.

And happy Saturday night or wherever it is for you.

We're chilling.

I think we're having fun because it's been a long day.

We're probably slightly delusional from many hours of gather.


SPEAKER_03:
But you're tagging me at eight o'clock in the morning and I'm like, I am not awake to be like YouTubing, like live streaming eight o'clock in the morning.

on a Saturday.

I'm like, I love you, man.

But like, I got my, I have my boundaries.

I got my limits.


SPEAKER_02:
The conversation we had at 2 a.m.

My time.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

Well, we were up talking about, so, okay.

So the one, like a couple of the issues, um,

number one, I find like, I find like, I feel like I need to go find a place to blink out of existence when I'm leaving gather.

Uh, and like, I, cause I just find it weird to be like, all right, I'm off.

And then like log out and like blink out of existence in a space.

Like, I feel like that would be so disruptive for other people around me.

So I'm like, I'm going to go find a corner to disappear.

And so then when I respond, I'm like in some weird corner somewhere.

Um,

And then the time thing, I have been a fail.

I've got a widget on my desktop.

I was a total fail last night on my first session.

And Sean's like, show your session's starting.

So I had to kind of hustle over to my session.

But fortunately, I wasn't too late.

And the people there were very, very forgiving about it.

We started at 9 p.m.

Pacific time, which was all sorts of different time schedules.

talking about ethics.

And I think I had to leave at quarter after 11.

So two and a half, it's like almost, this isn't this, you know, this is my story.

So I'm like, so then the conversation went for four hours.

So, so yeah, we went like, we went over our one hour, we were at well over the two hour mark when I'm like, I have to go parent my kids where

yelling at me to tuck them into bed.

And, you know, if they still want that, I'm there for it.

Because they're getting to the age where they're getting to, like, thanks, Mom, I got it.

So, yeah, I had to go do that.

But, yeah, that was great.

I don't know how much longer it went on.

Sean, you were still there when I left.


SPEAKER_02:
For a little bit.

I had to go to the session.

It was 6 a.m.

my time.

I think it was like 11, maybe UTC, where it was in actually the Moon Pond.

Most of the sessions were in the live session room.

But this was a really fun one.

And it's happening again Sunday.

You got to check the program because I don't remember the time.

But it's Jax and my wife Marie are co-facilitating a Luna balance session.

And it's quite different from other sessions because it's breathing exercises.

It's like embodiment in that sense.

And it just reset me completely.

Highly recommend.

All these sessions are amazing.

The one thing I did want to kind of bring up was what Jen was talking about, which is that UTC time difficulty.

This is something that we're doing this cycle.

And we are a global community.

And in some sense, there's things that we need to do to address that.

There is no one time zone that makes sense anymore to talk in.

But it is a lot of cognitive overhead to have everything in the program be UTC and have to convert to your local time.

And we're still trying to figure out on the organizing side, how do you make that simpler?

Any thoughts, Jen?

What do you think, Dan?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I don't know.

I would say that I think it's a wonderful example.

Like, I'm not mad.

I'm just sorry if I mess it up.

Because it's the converting from military time into the 12-hour clock time.

And because, you know, the widget that I have has got an analog face.

And so it's the having to do two conversions, I think.

I can do military time and I can add or subtract seven hours, but it's the having to do two in a row.

And when I was writing out my schedule, because I was like, okay, let me get my times right.

I was also on a lot of allergy medicine.

So I think it was fighting against me.

But I think it's a great example, like a simple example, you know, we're in North America where, you know, the changes that we have to make aren't that big.

is it's a super simple explanation of privilege.

And it is my privilege that generally I never have to think about this, so I'm really bad at it.

And so I don't have any objection to using UTC, using the military's time for UTC.

I think it makes it much simpler.

And I think it's great that it puts some of us out of our comfort zone and asks us to do the work that we've been kind of maybe unconsciously asking our colleagues

and our friends to do for us without saying anything.

So that's like, I don't have any like solutions for like, you know, this is how we're gonna fix, you know, like make it simpler, which I think is a goal is because we wanna reduce barriers.

But I just think it's just such a great little tiny model of how we can understand privilege in our lives, so.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, Jen.

I really agree.

It's really made me think this weekend.

Yeah, if that's logistical, okay, that's a calculation.

That's something you can figure out on the back of an envelope.

How about things you can't figure out on the back of an envelope, like actually finding meaning that connects across disciplines or across cultures?

And so that's the one that we can see.

That's the one we can calculate.

And now how do we use that as a little bit of a guide and as a reminder for everybody on all sides of the table

when we're working together.

So pretty cool stuff.

In this evening live stream again for us, but anytime for you, we're going to be working through a Jamboard and I've passed the link into the chat.

I'll pass it there again.

This Jamboard, a lot of the slides we went through earlier in the second live stream.

So you'll see a lot of remarks that have been

modified a lot of uh post-it notes there and we're just going to pass pretty quickly through the first set of slides we're going to start on the first slide and just pass quickly through those and then get really in this live stream to the team formation section in this live stream we want to make sure that if you're listening live and you want to get on a team we want to get you on a team in this next few hours

And for those of you who are watching live in replay who aren't sure exactly which team you want to get on, we're going to go through the team formation form again and just make sure that each question is addressable and that you're going to have a way to go about finding who you want to be on that team with.

So right now I have the first slide up.

And it basically just says hello.

So that's kind of a fun welcoming slide.

We had people writing in different languages, giving different welcomes from wherever they were at.

And I think the first slide we can just take a pause at is that second slide where Monica Kang gave us great reminders.

If people in the chat want to write any questions,

We're free to address any questions, or you can also just make your comments directly into the Jamboard.

Maybe just one great thought.

Law.mit.edu wrote, how can we, in a single sentence,

give away on how to access a conversation in Galatech.

So what would you say to somebody who's coming to Gather for the first time?

What do you think is the one-sentence version of what's important to know when you're logging on for the first time?

Sean, Gather committee, please, what would you say?


SPEAKER_02:
The most important thing when you first log in to Gather, is that the question?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
Getting into the cafe as soon as possible.

Just getting to where the action is.

Because you start in a welcome home.

Because we want it to be comfortable when you first arrive.

You're not dropped right into the middle of a bunch of interactions that you're not ready for.

But that space is there for people to load for the first time, for the most part.

And for there to be a little info booth if somebody has questions and someone's there to answer them.

But you need to go to the right pretty much immediately to get into the cafe.

And then from there, you're at the hub.

where all the other rooms connect.

So I would say one of the first things to do is really just go where the action is and then just be comfortable entering conversations.

The thing in the chat, we're talking a little bit about other tools like Zoom or Hangouts.

And one thing that I think Gather really has over a Zoom, for instance, is we have breakout rooms just like Zoom, but you have the ability to enter and leave them at your leisure, really.

And it's much more organic to like you've been seeing kind of during these facilitated live sessions.

People can start in a big space where everyone can see each other.

And then instead of the host kind of sending people to breakout rooms like you do in Zoom, it's more like go walk yourself over there.

And then that that changes.

difference is huge, because now the power is in your hands to go decide who do I want to go talk to, or maybe this conversation is not doing it for me.

Maybe I'll just respectfully say, oh, I'm going to go this way now.

Bye.

It's harder to do that in a Zoom setting.

But once you get that or it's comfortable for you,

it really opens up, I think, as a powerful platform, because then it's in your control to do whatever you want in that space.

And the affordances of that space are massive.

There's so much you can do, especially if you're interested in getting involved in the committee or learning how to build in the space.

It's so extensible.

Anything a facilitator might want, we can construct for them to facilitate engagements within.

And it's just Zoom personally is too limited for, I think, what our community does, especially with the kind of agent-based perspective that naturally kind of comes with complexity thinking.

You live it in Gather.

You're embodied as a little agent.

And your interactions are right in front of you.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, great point.

And our tech stack is always an evolving process.

So if somebody sees an opportunity to suggest, give feedback, make a contribution, that's what the community is there for.

And we've seen Gather develop tremendously in the last year of using it.

And we hope to build it out even further on a few dimensions just to name them before we jump into the more team based sections.

we'd love to see video enabled on mobile we'd love to see some of these random tech hijinks ironed out like people who for example can't hear each other in a session for some inexplicable reason and i think on our side we can do a better job with the welcoming committee 24 7 a human should be there to greet people because that's what makes the difference and just popping into another hollywood squares video chat

is just another video chat but when you can show up in a house and there's a human waiting there for you that's going to be pretty cool and pretty special so on this tab we have some comments from monica on online collaboration hopefully people can just look through these and we'll just pass um

pretty quickly through these first couple of slides.

But anybody who has ideas on online collaboration, feel free to add a post-it note here or write a comment in the live chat because we're certainly all learning from each other in terms of online collaboration.

Some of us have been online collaborators for many years.

others have been uh thrust into it in the last 18 months or so and we're all learning by doing on this frontier and the fun is to connect these big complexity ideas that we talk a lot about like phase transitions agent-based modeling all that kind of stuff with the mundane with the day-to-day of the video chats so that's pretty cool

All right.

On slide three, we earlier heard about people's intention.

And again, people could add a post-it note.

Jen, what was your intention coming into the weekend or what did you hope to get out as a facilitator?

Like what made you step up to be a facilitator rather than just registering as a participant?


SPEAKER_03:
So, you know,

I, this is the third time I've been a facilitator.

So I've done all the online ones and I've popped through a heartbeat here and there.

And so I really love the team building parts of things like the, and like that part of like the facilitating the teams happening and other people projects and like,

I was actually thinking about something.

I've got like a project that I've been kind of working on.

Maybe next complexity weekend, I'll bring it out.

Cause I was thinking, I was like, you know, I kind of think like, maybe this is the space now, but in the meantime, like, you know, I, I, you know, I love being a researcher.

I love developing new knowledge, but I also love being a teacher and a mentor.

And so it's actually, I think an area where, you know, I'm, you know, broadly knowledgeable about,

at a low level across a lot of different complexity domains so that I can understand the conversation, even if I'm not gonna be the one making the new discovery in it.

And so when you get these teams of people together, when you get folks come together, a lot of times there's a lot of people that are interested in an idea, but they come from really different domains and they can be having a hard time communicating with each other.

And then, so I think that it's a place where I can kind of shine

with being able to understand something about ecology and understand something about some other topic and be able to kind of translate until they can get the ball rolling themselves.

And just kind of like helping people get to a shared language, because I think that's always one of our real stumbling points is,

you know, particularly when we're specialists, we can get so bogged down in our own jargon where we're demonstrating proficiency to other members of our small community that that jargon then, and then also we use the same words as other disciplines and they don't mean the same thing.

So like just being able to come in and kind of translate and, you know,

kind of refocus expectations.

Like I know last Complexity Weekend, I was talking to somebody, lengthy conversation about they had an app that they wanted to develop, but they weren't running into developers.

And I was like, okay, well, who are the people that are here?

And how can they contribute to some aspect of this project?

And they were like, hey, great point.

Like, you know, I'm running into all these people.

And they just took a piece of their big project that was like kind of their dream project and really developed it last Complexity Weekend.

And it was also a great, I love the long one-on-one conversations or long small group conversations.

And I think that that's just, for being a facilitator, I get that out of it.

So that's what I really enjoy.


SPEAKER_01:
So.

Cool.

I think we're really experimenting with new forms of teaching, mentorship, leadership.

We've all seen areas where we could improve in all of those areas.

And we're going to learn by doing together.

And it's not going to be perfect in 2021.

It's not going to be perfect in 2022.

I'm sorry to those who thought next year was going to be perfect.

but we're going to be improving as a community of practice and when i look at these intentions that people have wrote it's really inspiring because it shows how it's such a multi-input multi-output system so it makes me excited to know that just people are showing up they're dealing with the lag they're dealing with any friction that they're getting on their side to show up and connect with other people who are having similar experiences

So on slide four, it's almost completely covered in ideas, but it asked initially, who are you and how do you discover complexity?

We're not going to go through that one at this moment, but definitely check out the Jamboard link.

And you'll notice that a lot of people have written at and then their Keybase username.

And so the Keybase username is an awesome way to stay connected with people because it's a stable digital identity.

So, for example, if you're curious, wait, someone got into the stock market and politics and then they moved over to network science and then they went over to doing something else all while they were an undergraduate.

You know, you can see the Keybase username here.

That's who you should message if you think that's an interesting trajectory.

And as we talked about a little bit earlier, areas where we have similarity, that's powerful.

That's like our shared identity.

And areas where we have differences, that's something we can respect and also learn about.

So it's fun to know how we have similarities and differences and how both of those are at the community level a strength.

Protein chemist, cell biologist, genomics, also social entrepreneur, working on systems change, the system of science as a sector of society.

So cool stuff.

Just each participant brings such a special energy and such a perspective.

Anything to add on this slide or we can move forward?


SPEAKER_03:
Oh, it's great.

We can go, but I'm going to come back and read this again.


SPEAKER_02:
It's just the diversity is what is striking to me.

I love how different, how many different perspectives there are present.

as in a given cohort.

And it seems to be getting more and more diverse, which is awesome.

And I think maybe a lot of that is stemming from the facilitators each cohort are also more and more diverse each time.

And that's really the goal for our community is to get as diverse as possible because as Dan was saying, like the more differences that we have in the cohort going into the weekend, the stronger we end up because then as we start to do what Dan was saying by understanding shared languages between everyone,

we get the similarities kind of gelled.

And then through those similarities, the differences can flow.

And having multiple differences on a team is a huge strength for the type of innovation we're going for, for these difficult problems.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

And I like this one.

I think that was just added, got into complexity and systems thinking via blockchain, specifically incentives and social systems in the space.

And so it really just shows how some people come from a theory side and they're learning about distributed systems.

And then they think, wow, blockchain is a real world example of a distributed system.

you have someone on the other side of that table who got excited in blockchain or in crypto for a totally different reason and then realized wait a minute this is part of a bigger concept distributed systems and it's the two roads the two directions on that freeway that come together and that's what's so special i think about learning by doing and about applying complexity

so we'll go to five so this one totally covered in writing it said what is something that you are curious or wondering about so sean dr curious what's something you're curious about and then jen i'm i'm curious to know what you're wondering about as well


SPEAKER_02:
You know what I'm curious about is I'm really curious to find out what teams are forming and have formed over this weekend.

It's always, from an organizer perspective, it's really funny because how did JP put it last night?

It was like reverse pentopticon or something like that where it's like we actually don't see much of the information because it's out in a distributed form.

It's not...

other than the team registration form, which we'll go through, that's like our one shot at seeing a snapshot of what's going on.

But it's always a huge surprise when we see what's actually been happening.

And I'm always blown away.

So like Sunday, when we get to the closing live stream and we get to all see what...

everyone else in our cohort has been up to this weekend, you're gonna be blown away because it's amazing really what ends up happening.

Every single cohort, it feels that way to me.

And so I'm just very curious about that.

And I just love how many Post-its are on here.

We are just such a curious community and that makes me so happy.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, I think if somebody could answer even one of these,

Please join us on the live stream.

Help us.

If you can answer all of them, then you get a gold star and I will buy you a beer if you're in California.

But it really just shows that curiosity drives the cat.

It's actually the energy that makes us navigate through the internet and connect with other people.

It's our curiosity.

So we try to keep that spark alive and stay curious when we're learning, even at a really advanced level.

And when we're applying, even for really serious topics, because I think something that's been a little bit different in this cohort than previous is we've had some pretty serious topics come up.

i think and i hope that our community has navigated that has been really inspiring because we want to have impact and that means real systems we care about and that can be quite serious issues that are not laughing matters but how can we do that in a way that's open-minded open-hearted collaborative that's something i'm really curious about and i would love to understand the best ways to coordinate on that especially in the online

Anything to add on that, either you two, or we'll just keep on moving forward through these first sections.


SPEAKER_03:
I'm, you know, again, I could spend, you know, I hope that I can get to the ice.

I haven't been to the moon room yet and I've toured the bar, but I haven't sat around in the bar, but it's like, I feel like these are ideas that,

I could just sit around with a beer and discuss for hours.

And I know that other people feel that same way too.

But, you know, but they're not just esoteric.

They have real world implications.

And I think that that's always, you know, that we're always kind of looking for, you know, it is fine to just be esoteric and academic and think about things for the sake of thinking about things without there being a specific goal in mind.

But there is so much like real applied work that comes out of this and

I don't know, we can go on to the next one, but these ideas are all blowing me away.


SPEAKER_01:
Great.

So on this next slide, we had a bird's eye view of our Gather space.

So we really appreciate the feedback, seriously, in the live chat about Gather.

The way that we approach our tech stack is as a complex system and in collaboration with our community each cycle.

So for each cycle of the weekend, the cohort-based weekend, each six months,

we approach it like taking off and landing a plane and then after that plane has landed before we take off for the next cycle we integrate feedback from every single role so we're going to share a feedback form later in the weekend and no matter what you thought no matter how much how little how positively how negatively it's especially important that we have your feedback because that's what we integrate when we do design for the next cycle

and this is the current status of the map and we had our gather committee again sean shouted out all the five members of that committee but that's really a multi-role committee and there was a bunch of participants who made this the way it was and

helped understand various aspects of Gather.

And we want to learn from people whose experience was glitchy or who couldn't figure out one aspect or another, because it's actually your feedback that helps us understand what to improve for the next cycle.

We're not going to get a 10 out of 10 perfect for every single person on every device, every operating system, every country on our first try.

That's why we've made such a strong commitment

to sticking around through deep time and improving no matter what, because we always take people's feedback into account.

It's really a critical piece of the entire process for us.

So maybe Sean, just since you were on the Gather Committee, what would you say about this overall layout?


SPEAKER_02:
Um, I think it is interesting, in the sense that everyone in the space right now has actually experienced maybe 60% of the space, because the space itself kind of opens up throughout the weekend.

So for example, the room that's circled in red here, the team co working space,

And then the team studios, which we're going to be entering into kind of later today, tomorrow, those two rooms are basically opening up now.

And I'm actually imagining now like a theatrical opening.

Now we have to do like the doors open to the, wow.

But you know, for now you just go walk into it.

Cause you probably didn't even notice it was there until now.

but go check it out and um it's gonna be really fun i i really am drawn to this idea of uh this gather space being a public co-working space like i don't know if anyone's familiar with co-working spaces or the idea of co-working but it's you know if you're gonna have team meetings why not have it in our cohorts uh gather space um

for as long as your team is meeting with this tech stack, just because your team might be having a meeting on every Monday or whatever, and maybe some other team meets Mondays and Tuesdays or something like that, you might collide.

And those collisions in the space, when you were just planning on having, rather than having a Zoom call where you're totally isolated, now you're networked up.

And those collisions and that serendipity is where a lot of innovation can occur.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, no, I've been reading all these notes.

To the person who said I just joined today, is it too late to participate?

No.

It is definitely, as long as it's going, there's time to participate and there's still so much more of the weekend to go.

So, you know, just jump in there, find conversations.

Hopefully they wrote that a while ago and that they gave it a shot and got in there.

But even if you just wrote that and we just saw it now, please still participate.

Number one, a holodeck.

Yes, a plus one.

I would give another plus one for holodeck.

As soon as we have that technology, I'm sure we'll be implementing it.

But a library, I think that's a great idea.

You know, we've been passing around

papers in the chat or on key base, but you know, that, that I could see that as definitely being a place to, to, you know, like a virtual space for a feature gather there.

So, yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

Yep.

And the Gatherer Committee for the next Heartbeat, which is going to be only four short weeks away, and especially the next weekend in November 2021, they're going to go back to this slide and they're going to take everyone's feedback into account.

So this is how you make feature suggestions for our community of practice.

And without putting it on a post-it, it's hard for us to capture that feedback.

But when people do step up, be brave and make the feedback, that's how we know to incorporate it in future iterations.

Sean?


SPEAKER_02:
I just wanna mention something while we're on this slide, and that is this team studio space, which I'm sure no one's really been in yet, but we are gonna start migrating to.

So the team coworking space, really after this live stream, let's register our teams, let's get going on that work.

And when you register your teams, one of the questions is, do you want a team coworking space?

So we're going to assign your team name to a coworking space, and it's your space to use.

Look at the little poster there to see how to use the space effectively.

Let's use the little call blocks to actually set up external stakeholder calls with facilitators so that we can get feedback on our projects.

But then moving into the studio space, this is something we're trying that's really new this cycle, and that is...

If anyone's been at a previous Complexity Weekend or watched any of the previous live streams, the Sunday live stream was always kind of a hilarious mess.

That was amazing to experience and watch because it's like however many teams there were, all of the teams came on to live stream in sequence to present.

And it worked, actually.

But we're trying something new this time where we're going to actually try to see if the default participation mode could be teams learning how to record content together.

So we've created this studio space where, again, you open the little... It's a Jitsi call block.

It's another service, a web-based video chat service, but you can record from it.

And so we're going to have teams go into these private studios and open up these Jitsi web pages and record...

three to five minute videos?

And can we train teams in how to work as remote collaborators, including how to communicate?

And so if we can, if we can learn how to create these videos together, maybe we can just string some videos together as the Sunday live stream.

And again, teams are welcome to come on if they want to do a live q&a.

Or if they want to just do a live presentation, that's still totally fine.

But we're just trying out this new mode of sharing that

has longer-term implications for the team because that's a useful skill to carry on well beyond the weekend.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep, and one new comment there.

How do we find people we quickly want to meet without traveling through the space?

So a short answer is you can go to the participant tab on the bottom left, and you can click on a person's name and then follow, and your avatar will just sprint over to them wherever they're at.

But the longer-term answer...

You can get blocked obstacles, so keep an eye out.

But the longer term answer is we don't want to converge too early on norms.

We actually want to allow for a bottom up discovery of the best and most accessible ways to do that.

So maybe it turns out that you can set your status.

Hey, I'm looking to talk to anyone about this programming language or gardening.

Cool, people will come and find you.

They'll see you in the list and they'll come follow you.

Or maybe you can say, I'm on a team looking for X skillset, but we wanna keep the space open for people who are having really awesome structural ideas about how to make that happen because we're really mindful about the cognitive burden and the overload.

Complexity is a big topic.

even if you've been studying it for years you know that there's a lot to learn and probably the more years you've been around the more you know there is to learn and for those who have been learning well welcome to doing there's a lot to do

So we're all learning on the application and the theory side.

And that's sort of the special challenge of complexity, but also the special opportunity.

If we were a disciplinary community and we said, we're in this country and this is our topic and this is how we think about it, then we'd have a straightforward answer.

But we want to hold the space for different perspectives on complexity and to understand that there's a total spectrum, as we saw from the participant stats, from total beginner to those who are very familiar with about 80% of people being probably under a 6 out of 10 in their self-assessed familiarity.

We're not just looking for the single answer here.

We want to find a process that through deep time is going to be accessible to a whole range of people.

And that's a slightly different answer than what's the most efficient answer for you right now, because that might not be the most accessible thing in the future.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
And, you know, let's not forget the value of being a beginner is that you're not already embedded in a way of thinking about stuff.

something and, you know, asking other people to stop and explain an idea to you makes them articulate it.

You know, explaining a concept for the first time, you can discover where you actually haven't mastered a concept or where you have some unsupported assumptions that could be re-evaluated.

And I think also beginner's

you know, they ask questions like, well, why can't it be this way?

And, you know, like, and it's such a, like, you know, and it's not the, well, it's not that way because it's just never been that way.

You know, like, and I think that there's such a value

to being a beginner and thinking about things in terms of like explain it to me and like questioning some of these underlying assumptions that if you've been doing something for a really long time, it's like the water you're swimming in, you don't really notice it.

And so I think that that's just such a value

you know, that, yeah, we do need to make sure that we make things accessible.

You know, technology spaces are kind of, you know, which this isn't exclusively a technology space, but we are in technology in this space too.

So, are notorious for being, like, having one-upmanship and, you know, being kind of snobby and so forth.

And I think the ethos of this event, though, is to kind of undermine that because there's a value.

It's not just because we're, you know, do-gooders.

but because we understand that there's a cognitive value to including beginners and for all of us to approach things like we are beginners.

And to be like willing to be bad at something and be willing to, you know, when you're an expert, I think that you can get very reluctant to move into new spaces because you don't want to reveal that, you know, like you just don't know about something, you know, because you feel that that might undermine your kind of overall identity.

as an expert in some particular subject.

So I don't know, just some thoughts there.


SPEAKER_01:
We're all beginners in more fields than we're experts.

And we're not here to build a precarious ladder.

We're not building the Tower of Babel.

We're building an anti-fragile social ecosystem.

And that means integrating some of these guidelines and values that we'll cover in just a few minutes.

So let's get back to the overview.

Whether you're totally just joining us, whether you just got added to the key base and just got access to the Gather a couple of minutes ago, or whether you've heard this a couple of times, the weekend is nonstop.

It's a truly global cohort.

There's about 200 registered participants from about 50 countries.

So that should just be a hint at the kind of diversity that we're seeing amongst participants.

On Friday, or really just the beginning, again, I use sort of the bathtub or the bookshelf metaphor because what is time anyway?

On Friday, we had a very epic and provocative discussion and presentation with Dave Snowden, who brought some

ideas some food for thought he laid out a buffet for thought for those who were there and for those who watched in replay because it was it was funny it was um again something to think about and discuss for all of us and that friday was really a focus on community we just wanted to have a keynote share what was happening and then adjourn to gather where we started to connect

interactively and then just to skip to the final book on the bookshelf sunday that's where we have the team closing ceremony and that's going to be a few hour live stream where we get to hear from the team presentations and one thing that differentiates complexity weekend from a lot of other hackathon styled events is

We're not competing, we're not judging, we're not grading, we're not evaluating, there's no rubric.

We're here to see what your team has gotten excited about and the purpose that you've discovered and co-created over the weekend, not evaluating you on some standard.

And everything in between that kickoff live stream

And that closing ceremony is ideally nonstop activity, facilitated sessions, office hours, and opportunity to bump into other participants.

This cohort in May 2020, we got closer to our goal, but I can't say that we got to our goal of continuous equal activity, but we see where we want to be in terms of equal access and activity across time zones, which is so important for us as a global community.

And also one other structural feature before Sean is this cohort was the first time we really significantly focused on the pre-weekend.

We had a two month pre-weekend.

Now, not all of you were here for the full two months and that's fine.

but we did have a two-month period where we had tools office hours, we had intro to complexity, and we also had one-on-one sessions, which were very powerful, where we had participants just connect one-to-one for a sequence of conversations.

And our hypothesis is that when we focus on the edges and on making those connections between participants strong, we're going to not just build a cohort experience and identity, but we're going to increase people's participation and their engagement with a cohort because they're not just showing up to get a lecture.

They're not just showing up for something that they can get another time whenever they feel like it because actually they can't.

You can't just say, well, was the party recorded?

No, I'm sorry.

It wasn't.

It was the people who were there when they were there.

And the one-on-ones helps emphasize that we're showing up for each other as people.

So this cohort, we focused on the people, the ideas, and the tools.

And we always came back to those three pillars as what stabilizes our experience and underpins our community.

Sean?


SPEAKER_02:
I just wanna go back to your point about equal programming.

And I think the thing that's really gonna help us go to the next level as a community of practice is having anyone who's watching this, participant, facilitator, rewatching this at some point later, we need you to step up and help us organize for this community of practice.

We need people outside

Pacific, Central.

That's kind of for the organizers for this particular cohort.

That's kind of where we're trapped right now.

And, you know, there was a whole segment of time last night where we had to sleep.

I didn't get much, but I got a little bit.

And no one's there to answer the phone.

Sorry, it's on fire.

It's just going to have to wait till the morning.

It's going to burn.

Yeah.

So we just need more people to step up who want to organize in this space.

It's a lot of fun.

But that would enable

pull us as a community of practice to have that organizer energy every hour of the day over the weekend so that there's always someone there to keep pushing and keep the flow kind of going.

And the facilitators do a great job of that as well.

And like I was saying before, our facilitator cohort this time is more global than last time.

And that is moving in the right direction as well.

These are just like Dan was saying, this is we see where we want to be.

This is how to get there is by us stepping up into this role for each other.


SPEAKER_01:
We're going to sleep well on Sunday night.

And then literally the next week, we're going to start planning for the five or four heartbeats before our November 2021 weekend.

We're going to start planning immediately.

And it's the feedback that people write that we're able to integrate.

So those are the kinds of things that we know that we need to do, like reach out to organizers and facilitators from all time zones.

So let's go to eight.

So just really quickly, if you're asking, how can I participate?

I want to participate.

I have a couple of hours.

I have two hours.

I have 20 hours.

I have 20 minutes.

Whatever it is, how can you participate?

Well, for one and two, it's at will.

It's whenever you want to.

You have been added to the Keybase team, complexweekend.may2021.

And you'll find that there you can opt into channels in Keybase, go to the gear next to the team name, and then browse channels.

And you join these explore channels, and you can find and share resources on different topics.

So that's one thing you can do anytime you have free minute.

You can also go to your participant single source of truth document and watch or rewatch the facilitator intro videos.

So that's kind of how we know as organizers that that facilitator is serious about showing up for you.

because no one is here to give a lecture.

And these are the kind of people who are facilitators who are asked to give lectures and they do give lectures.

Maybe they're even giving a lecture next week, but when they're showing up for Complexity Weekend, they're showing up for a community of practice.

And that means that they're here to lead from the middle.

They're there to learn by doing alongside you and to be on a team or to help you facilitate your team formation.

That's what facilitation is.

It's like catalysis.

It's like accelerating what you and your journey, your relationships, your teams are up to.

Yeah, on the first two points there, Sean,


SPEAKER_02:
I actually want to talk about the facilitator point.

I think something that we learned a lot this cycle was what makes a great facilitation session.

And, you know, we're getting away from the broadcast, which is good because the normal mode that, like you're saying, they're probably giving lectures next week.

You know, it's like that is the normal mode.

But at Complexity Weekend, it's not as effective to stand and broadcast, you know, a slide deck to everyone when we're all primed and ready.

to interact.

And so what has made some amazing sessions and will continue to make amazing sessions is broadcast that information.

You have that knowledge and that experience.

Do share that, but don't spend a whole hour doing it.

Maybe spend the first 20 minutes, maybe spend some amount of time

And then send the participants off to interact in these different interaction zones in the live session room.

Let them process together what you're teaching them.

And you can go onto the broadcast tile and feed more information in or guide those interactions, but ultimately give that space for participants to interact because it's through those participant interactions and through the novel information that gets created by those interactions that some of the most valuable, that's where the value really is, I think, for these participants a lot of the time.

Cool.


SPEAKER_03:
And yeah, there's actually, yeah, go for it.

Yeah.

There's actually, uh, so this is one of the things that I think is great about the gather space and the fact that it is changeable.

Like when I, the first time, you know, I was just wandering around at whatever time, uh,

checking out the new gather space and I found the moon pond and I could see all the virtual, uh, is it like a Zafu is the pillow that you sit on and the Zabuton is the bigger cushion underneath you.

Um, I just like them cause they're good Scrabble words, but, uh, but like, you know, there's like, I can walk into the space and see like, I'm like, Oh, somebody is going to lead like a, like a meditation and breathing session.

Like, you know, you can, you can see that that's set up that way.

And, um,

And, you know, so I instantly kind of got what the space was for, but yeah, because it's this, you know, we don't need a, I mean, I, and I do lecture, you know, in my regular job, I do regular feedbacks for my students.

And if anything, they're just like, you can talk less.

And, but, but there's this whole, which is only you're paying me for this.

But, but there's a whole pedagogy around,

like physical activities that you can do in a traditional brick and mortar classroom that disrupts the didactic.

I stand in front of the classroom with my podium and my multimedia display.

And it's this power, like I'm an archeologist.

So I think about how our built environment informs what kind of activities.

And if you've been in a lecture hall and try to do some of these activities like think, pair, share,

which is a great way to interact with your fellow students and is, you know, if you're in this tiered auditorium with desks that all face in one direction, it's very hard to do this activity.

Whereas the gather space has these opportunities.

And of course, any facilitator, you know, going forward, if you have an idea and the gather space isn't already organized for it, you just say something ahead of time.

And they'll build it for your session.

And by they, I mean Sean and company.

And, you know, but so I walked into the session rooms to kind of check everything out to be like, oh, is my idea going to work?

And I'm like, you know, here's this group discussion area on the green rug.

And then there's the, you know, like the small breakout rooms on the brown rugs.

And then one-on-one and a facilitator can come up.

And it's really very thoughtful for kind of getting out of these,

this power relationship of, like, I stand, I'm the expert, I lecture at you, and gets to this more organic, you know, egalitarian relationship, and, you know, I think that that's just such a powerful thing, and I'm looking forward to, as we move forward with more Complexity Weekends, bringing in this kind of

these pedagogies from the real world and seeing how they play out in this virtualized space.

Because this working exclusively in a virtualized space is kind of, yes, some people have been doing it for a really long time, but now all of us are thrust into it.

Or not all of us.

There's people that work regular jobs and have been going to workplaces.

But like my students, for example, I've taught all online.

before to students who that was their choice but whereas I'm teaching to students it's not their choice they'd rather be in a classroom and how do I you know flex to like you know what how does that change so I think that this is a whole the the the pandemic you know we're kind of entering the next phase as you know as Dave said on Friday it ain't over yet but we're kind of moving into this next phase and

And what do we take out of this first phase as we move into this next phase to make all these tools work for us?

And, you know, we've seen, like I know coming out of the Differently Abled community is like that, oh, so you all kind of worked virtually all along?

You know, like, and, you know, so I think that there's going to be some really deep water changes.

And I think it's really exciting to be here at Complexly Weekend where we can actually experiment in these spaces and then make changes really quickly, perhaps even faster than the work world or the academic world.

So.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

Thank you.

I want to just say something real quick about interactions.

So if you're watching this live, actually right after this in live session room A, I'm going to be running my facilitated session.

And what's interesting about facilitators at Complexity Weekend is they're always kind of pushing the envelope on kind of how to create new interactions.

And so during the session, if you're interested at all in learning programming from scratch, basically, if you've always been interested in programming, you want to just start in any capacity, we're actually using the upper right interaction zone.

uh which isn't used that much right now it's kind of a new one that we're experimenting with and it's a paired learning environment so we i've done the session once before and i'm doing a second time kind of learning from that and what's going to happen basically is participants are going to two of them in pairs are going to go and sit in this private space and one of them is going to open a browser and they're going to be working on a browser-based python terminal together and then and then as a facilitator i'll hop between the different tables to try to guide

individual pairs and them learning together something.

And it's just trying out a new interaction type that could expand to other browser-based experiences, modeling agent-based models, for instance, or something like that.

So if you're interested in that, come to that.

Looking into what to do to participate, there's already a new novel interaction that we're experimenting with.

Come be involved in that experiment.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

So three is just join gather.

And again, we experimented with the welcoming committee.

This is our first time having a welcoming committee and we want to build it out to 25, eight, if you know what I mean.

Number four, you can check the program and you can attend live facilitated sessions as well as office hours because we have such a diverse set of facilitators.

So just trust us in that if you show up and you ask a facilitator any kind of question, they're either gonna have an interesting conversation with you or they'll be able to route you to somebody who you're looking for.

And then five is again on Keybase, you can check out our cohort team and go to the I need a team Keybase channel, as well as the explore channels.

And that's where you can engage with people who have shared interest and also let people know that you're looking for a certain kind of team or a certain kind of teammate.

So that's really cool because it's also what differentiates a community of practice from say a community of interest or of shared attention, Jen.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, so I think that's an area where I've been getting a lot of questions.

I think from some people who aren't kind of used to the hackathon idea, which, you know, this has some, you know, foundations in, is like, kind of like, how do I find a team?

How do I make a team?

So, like, definitely, like, you know, and I'm, you know, a little like,

Talk to people and like, what are you interested in?

I will help you find people.

So like definitely hit your facilitators because this is our job is to make these connections.

And you know, like I'll go hunting through, you know, a key base.

You know, I just habitually subscribe myself to every explorer.

I don't get, like, most of them I haven't even had a chance to read, but I'll just, like, I got some time to burn.

There's nobody on this couch that I'm sitting on in Gather, and I'll just start reading, you know, one of the other, you know, like, a channel that I haven't looked at so far because everything's interesting going on, and it, you know, it gives me an opportunity to kind of get a feel for all of the really interesting ideas that are going on.

Like, you, first of all,

You're not going to do everything because there's too much that happens simultaneously.

But, you know, the downside of that is you can miss the part that you are really interested in.

And, you know, I'm a facilitator.

My job is to kind of help get you there.

So definitely ask me or any of the other facilitators that you see or just go to general and be like, help, help.

I need a facilitator to help me with this.

And I think it's a super responsive group where somebody will be on it within minutes, unless it's 4 o'clock in the morning Pacific Standard Time and we're all asleep.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Thank you, Jen.

Facilitators are my hero.

Anybody who steps up for participants and helps them make them feel welcome,

feel like they're in the right place.

That's the most special thing.

It goes so much beyond an eloquent lecture, so much beyond a clever program is to make a human feel like they're included in a community.

So that's really special.

And I appreciate that you've come back again and again to help us make that happen.

So I've jumped over to 10.

We're going to quickly talk about this sort of swooping down from purpose through values to guidelines.

And then we're going to focus in the second hour mainly on the team formation.

So what are we doing here?

No one's being paid to be here.

What are we actually doing in Complexity Weekends?

We have a few answers for that, and we can give you the May 2021 version, but it's also evolving.

And as we had brought up earlier on our previous live stream,

this is the space for people to add post-it notes and to give thoughts on what our collective purpose can be because we really do look through these documents when we're planning the next cycle so again within the cycle we implement we deploy we make it happen and then we take a break and we reassess so our collective purpose is to learn complexity by doing

to serve through deep time, and we include to innovate.

Diversity is key.

Participation is essential in its core to transdisciplinary practice.

And then also just to highlight a few of these new ideas that other folk have shared in the previous live stream.

For example, we pushed the meme of complexity to new audience.

we consider the quality of care of other as the glue that holds joint explorations together that's really a nice idea like almost complexity as connective tissue for the disciplines and then the community as the connective tissue for complexity that's what holds complexity together is the community around complexity

And anybody who's been around for the previous decades has known that there are a few institutions who have done an amazing job in coordinating the community around complexity.

And as we head into this new phase, which is global,

It's unconventional.

It includes people who don't have a PhD in statistical physics.

It includes people who can't travel to New Mexico for a whole summer.

It includes a whole range of people.

And we want to be there to serve everyone.

So if either of you have any thoughts on this, please.

Otherwise, we can continue on.


SPEAKER_02:
Jen, it's you.

I hear me all the time.

I think you should talk about.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, well, I mean, I really like the notion of serving through deep time.

And, you know, in terms of like, you know, kind of what are we doing here?

You know, this, this event's never going to be perfect, but I think all of us who kind of like do complexity, like we know it's path dependent and always evolving.

So, and, you know, because every iteration is going to be like, ah, but it could have, you know, like in this forks and we're going to explore as many of this possible as possible, I think as a community.

So, you know, I think that it's,

You know, of course we love the mycelium analogy and how, you know, the connective tissue idea too.

So yeah, but the serving through deep time, it's like, you know, what are we doing here?

And kind of like, what is our purpose?

You know, and that we're going to keep on doing this and it's going to change every single time a little bit.

There's going to be some themes, you know, and some things are going to die out and new ones are going to emerge.

I don't know.

I think it's a fascinating project to be part of and kind of why are we all doing this for free?

But it's worth it.

I get a lot out of it.

So I was super excited.


SPEAKER_02:
Speaking of deep time, I think it's important to realize that we're not always going to be the organizers.

We're not always going to be the facilitators.

The idea is we're building something larger than ourselves, this kind of super organism that can keep living on, right?

We call them monthly heartbeats for a reason because it is this complex adaptive system that we're building that's growing and evolving.

And, you know, we can hopefully step away someday and it will keep going.

And this purpose, you know, will evolve and change as it naturally will, but it's still rooted in this history.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, something to think about.

Cool.

From the purpose, we zoom into our collective core values.

And these are, again, things where people can add other thoughts and comments.

But I think the only one that I'll focus on and read out here is just the first one, which is complexity weekend is itself a complex system.

And just how complexity includes so many perspectives under that banner.

Thinking about complexity weekend as a complex system, at least for me, helps

ask for feedback from participants.

It helps think about phase changes.

It helps think about accessibility.

It's like a mindset that helps us approach so many other aspects of community in a way where we can take a yes and perspective.

And it's not gonna be, well, is it accessibility or is it interdisciplinarity?

why make that kind of a framing when we can use complexity to help us understand them all if you any of you two want to give a comment otherwise we can continue on jen especially since we haven't heard that much from you yeah okay cool really because i'm usually like i usually in a conversation it's like dan and i duking it out on like the the stats so like


SPEAKER_03:
You know, there's like this long series of conversations and it was like Jen talked 33% of the time, Dan talked 30% of the time.


SPEAKER_01:
Nice.

Oh, on Jitsi.

Yes.

I'll drop it on.

You can, you can see these, the participant speaker stats and you can see who's spoken for how much time.

Yeah.

It's a fun stat and it's something to be considered in context, not as just a leaderboard, for example.

So we'll continue on.


SPEAKER_03:
Right.

Yeah.

Cause I, I definitely feel like we'll tangent and just jump from idea to idea.

Cause like, you know, when we're talking about applied complexity ideas,

like, you know, I'll, I'll just be like, and this and that.

And, and, you know, it definitely feeds the way the complexity week in itself is a complex system.

Definitely feeds the way my personal brain works, which tends to be, you know, more cloud-based and less like linear.

And that it's such a, like, you know, just having this opportunity to have like spark these conversations and bounce off of each other and vibe with each other.

Um,

And then so I've been around, as you guys have, enough times to know that this is going to be, this is also a unique moment in time, that this is never going to happen again.

We don't get into the same stream twice.

And to enjoy this moment while we've got it as well, and that there's continuity.

I don't know.

So just like how this will continue to be, as I said, when we were looking at the previous slide,

It'll never be perfect, but it will keep on going.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

And also just to highlight a comment from Leon in the chat, consent is super important.

I appreciate the acronym.

Consent comes with a side of F.R.I.S.E.

Freely given, reversible, informed, enthusiastic, and specific.

That's something I'm definitely going to copy out right now and put in our channel because we want to encourage participation along those lines.

Like if you want to freely opt in to an Explore channel,

it's reversible.

It's hopefully informed.

If you're not enthusiastic, then you can leave.

And it's specific.

It's about a topic.

So how can we bring these kinds of

frameworks and models that help people feel included and basically able to participate safely in a space, and then take that to a topic that people might think, again, like Jen had said, they might think complexity is esoteric, or they might think, but I'm not a PhD, or I'm not a Schwibbity, or I'm not whatever, but that's okay, because we want to build a space where we actually can all come together across those differences.

Yeah, Jen, on that.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I mean, and

So this participation means accessibility and inclusion for all as a value.

It's great to be a beginner.

It's great to be an expert.

It's great to be somewhere in between.

But that's not the only part of accessibility and inclusion.

I see the note about include other languages.

And that's a big technological challenge I think that we would all like to meet and be moving towards.

But inclusion.

you know, going, going back to that is, you know, so my, uh, sessions have been about, let's talk about ethics, but ethics and I think, you know, diversity and inclusion and equity issues are really tightly linked and, you know, I, it's, it becomes one of those subjects that I think, um,

People feel like it's esoteric, it doesn't have to do with me.

Or I have good intentions and that should be enough.

Or that would be a great cherry on the sundae, but what we really need to do is code.

And how that can select for very narrow groups of people that already have these skills and the accumulated privilege that builds up behind that, that carries that momentum.

But the inclusion, when I talk about inclusion, I'm always just like, look, it's good for everyone to do it.

And I think that that's one of the reasons why we're seeing it as a core value here in Complexity Weekend is if the only reason why you're doing it is because it increases whatever you view your bottom line is, then it does that as well.

If the working to build a better world

And, you know, wanting to hear all voices wasn't reason enough for you.

It is a bottom line value.

You know, if you just want to be like straight up, you know, what's in it for me.

And I always want to make sure that, you know, if that's the only way you want to evaluate whether something's worthwhile doing, it does that too.

So, you know, I can see, you know, we talked about the UTC thing at the beginning.

And, you know, this is always something that

we're gonna be building on and working on is greater inclusion.

And also, if you ever feel as a participant that you are not being included, also please find a facilitator or an organizer.

And it is our job to straighten those situations out.

um so you know because like you know sometimes we can't advocate for ourselves so know that this the com that the the organizer and facilitator community is there for you to help you sort that stuff out it's not just all on you cool thanks jen


SPEAKER_01:
So let's go to slide 13 and Sean will rejoin whenever his computer can handle it.

Team registration.

So maybe while we dwell on this slide, before we walk through the registration form, or really just focus on who's here right now who wants to join a team.

Jen, what advice do you have for people who are like, okay, I had five and a half cool conversations about 10 and a half topics.

where do I go?

How do I go from cool convo key based message, maybe a fun, uh, interaction or two to a team.

And what, what does that mean and how do we get there?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

So, you know, uh, so I'm used to being a facilitator here, but I've done, you know, clearly we've done events like this in the past in other contexts is, you know, first you start with these cool conversations and then you, uh,

you kind of go to like, Hey, do you want to work on that?

Or like, is there an idea here?

And it's, it's, um, you know, kind of like with the people that you're talking to, um, you know, just be like, is there a kernel here?

Is this a project that you want to work on?

Um, you know, I think, is this just something we want to let lie as a cool conversation or is there a deliverable here?

Um, so I've seen, um,

work that's contributed to a master's thesis come out of this.

It's certainly like informing doctoral work.

I think that there's been, you know, some business plans that have, you know, I don't know if they've come to full fruition, but they've definitely been kicked around.

And oftentimes those are people come to Complexity Weekend with these ideas.

um but like what is it that you would like to do would you like to write a paper um you know does it do you want it to be an industry white paper about best practices um like does something just really bug you and you want to make an impact back in the outside world outside of complexity weekend and then when you're talking to people that are you know kind of bouncing off the same ideas you know it it can be it can be a little intimidating but you know

It's sort of like in the classroom, if you have a question, probably three other people do too.

And, you know, other people are looking for teams also.

And just be like, you know, if you're feeling shy, find like kind of a sideways way to be like, hey, wouldn't that be a cool project to work on?

Not everybody has the energy or the personality type to be a leader.

But if you throw it out there, you can find people to organize with.

And that's where we have this, it's a little confusing at first, the self-organizing principle of team formation.

And I've definitely been getting a lot of questions from people going like, how do I find a team?

And I'm like, okay, well, make sure you go to the I Need a Team channel or throw concepts out in the general channel or find explore channels that are around your ideas.

But, you know, sometimes it's, you know, it's up to you.

To be like, hey, I've got this thing, like, you know, or maybe you and I could work on this.

Or I've been thinking about a white paper.

Is that something that you would like to contribute to?

And kind of let this kind of bottom-up organization come out of things.

So I think thinking about what you want your end product to be or an end product that you would like to contribute to might be good if you're looking to plant a seed and nurture a seed.

for a team.

And then, you know, as you're wandering around talking to people, and I think there's going to be a lot of team formation tonight.

I don't know how many teams are already registered, but you know, this is kind of like people come together and things start really, you know, bouncing together.

So I don't know.

Yeah.

Cause it is self-organizing.

And I think that that can be, you know, as we talk about gather space and how that helps us, you know, organize our orientation is just like the self-organizing principles of finding a team.

can be a little odd when we're maybe used to being like, okay, I'm gonna put you five people together.

And cause that's not what the organizers and the facilitators are here to do.

We're here to like get conversations going and help you all find each other.

So.


SPEAKER_01:
So Sean, before I jumped to you, I jumped over to 15 to get to the, are you looking for a team member slide or Sean, do you wanna go there first?

But I just wanted to get up this slide so that if you're watching live or in replay,

Is your team missing a perspective, a skillset, a stakeholder, a discipline?

Just put your team name, your channel name, your key base name on the left side.

Or if you're on the other side of the table, feel free to say, hey, I know A, B, and C, and I'm looking for a team on these topics.

So feel free to be posting here.

And Sean, go for it.

And then I have a nice question from the chat.


SPEAKER_02:
Sure.

It's slide 16, by the way, in Jamboard.

Are you looking for team members is the big red header.

No worries.

And so a couple of things.

One is at this point in the weekend, anything can be a team seed.

So keep that in mind.

An interaction that you randomly have and gather, if you're enjoying the conversation and you're really getting somewhere with somebody,

That is a team seed.

You can form that into a team.

If you're joining a live session and you're really enjoying the interactions that are being facilitated, talk to the facilitator, talk to the other participants.

Any of that could be a team seed.

This is the moment now to start finding who you want to work with.

It doesn't have to be forever.

It's just to learn by doing.

And that can continue on after the weekend or it can just before the weekend.

It is totally your, choose your own adventure of how you want to take what you can out of this weekend and grow from it.

So that's one point.

The other point to what Jen was saying with the different outcomes you can focus on, focus a team around, it is good to focus on deliverables.

Not to the point we've seen teams dissolve in the past if they don't hit that first outcome they're trying to go for.

So maybe not so aggressively that you're pinning the whole existence of the team on it.

Or maybe you do, because maybe the team, you want to just do that deliverable or not.

But of any type of outcome you could think to do, a white paper

a peer-reviewed paper, a business plan, a consulting business, an education program, anything you could think of, I bet you somebody in this cohort has done it and can tell you their wisdom from having done it.

And then the last thing is I need to see some post-its on this.

We need to start getting serious right now.

This is time to meet and put it out there.

Our team needs a developer.

We need someone who knows how to work with databases.

We need somebody who has the perspective of statistics.

That needs to be posted here and put your key base contact information so that we can start connecting and making this happen.

And then on the other side, I have these things I want to contribute.

I'm interested in these things.

I just don't know what teams are out there around this.

That needs to be visible to everyone right now so that that information is out there so that the facilitators, the organizers, the other participants can take that information you're putting out there

and filter it through this network that is now our highly networked cohort.

This is the time to do it.

So let's pause for a second.

Let's get some stuff on here.

And I'm going to start doodling or something.

Something's happening.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool, so couple of notes.

First, this is one way that we include our global cohort is with asynchronous tools like Jamboard.

So not every single person in our cohort is live watching, but we hope that many of them will watch it in replay and see your Keybase name.

So that's one point is async.

The second thing is, if you've succeeded in

government impact, academic publishing, nonprofit, as well as innovation.

Great, truly, congratulations.

But we all have things to learn.

And so that's why we're here working on Teams, because we really all have not just little micro details to improve on, but truly vast areas of practice and theory to learn about.

So, oh, nice drawing, incredible drawing.

Actually, Sean, wow.

Tell me something's going on there.

This is great.

So that's another point.

We really all have something to learn.

Let's get to some of these awesome questions in chat.

So Barbara asks, can we see the teams that are registered already?

Sean, what would you say to that?

Or I'm happy to answer.


SPEAKER_02:
Sorry, the question is what teams are already registered?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, can we see the teams that are already registered?


SPEAKER_02:
The teams that are registered, we don't necessarily share that because we don't know if the teams want that shared.

We really leave it to the teams on Sunday to opt in or out of sharing.

Teams can completely be private if they'd like to, and that is totally respected.

We do share it with the facilitators because it's their role to help the teams.

And we actually even ask the teams in the registration if they want to be connected to facilitators.

So I'm not going to share the team registration.

I will say of all the teams I know are out there, they're not all registered.

And there's more out there than I know.

So we need to start filling out that form at some point this evening so that we can get to work and really push towards Sunday.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep, we really never want to share information that a team hasn't explicitly made it clear that they want to share.

So on the team registration form, we do ask a question.

So I'll just go to the form and have it up on a live stream.

We ask,

Are you open to have new team members join over the weekend?

Keep in mind, we're an inclusive and global community of practice.

So that three-hour convo that felt like a lifetime to you, well, there's an awesome person who is sleeping.

So let's include them.

And if a team hits yes on this, we will...

surface that in the relevant ways.

But again, remember that Complexity Weekend, it's not a pitch on Sunday and then see you later.

It's actually just the beginning of your team's journey.

So if you say yes to this question, especially,

But if you come back to a heartbeat and you give a spotlight talk and you give us an update and you say, yeah, I am still looking for participants on this team.

So we will find a way to share the information.

It might not be between this moment and the Sunday closing ceremony because not every team has requested that kind of visibility.

But for teams that have requested that kind of within weekend visibility, we're going to share about it.

And then for any team that wants to present in the Sunday closing ceremony, you're going to hear about them.

And they definitely should include in their closing discussion, like, hey, by the way, this is just like a few UI UX designers talking about blockchain.

So if you're a developer, come in touch with us.

So that's the opportunity.

Another question said,

um what about teams that are uh apprehensive about making a video so a few answers to that first my facilitator session is about de-stressing and making a chill way to have those videos get recorded but alternatively you can come on a live stream or if you don't want to do a live stream or a video it's also okay we totally respect that and you can be not making a video

because it's not about just surfacing the tip of the iceberg before it's ready to be surfaced.

It's again about including to innovate and about serving through deep time.

So we're not going to force anybody to be visible as a part of a project that they don't want to be seen as visible in if they're not ready to present yet.

Jen, what would you say about that?

And then I have a few more questions.


SPEAKER_03:
So I have to say between the pandemic and teaching and complexity weekend,

I have had extreme anxiety.

Like I really hate recording myself.

I'm definitely one of those stare at my face while I'm, I'm a live streaming kind of person.

So hopefully that's not too distracting to everybody.

And this has been part of like getting used to this, you know, sort of way of interacting with other humans for me, but I am a hundred percent sympathetic to

I don't like to record myself.

And there might be other reasons, like personal safety reasons, why somebody doesn't want to record themself.

We work really, really hard for privacy for everybody, but every system is imperfect.

And privacy for people is a core organizing principle for us and the tools that we choose.

But everything's imperfect.

you know, like for me, just getting more used to being in this format has been like a real challenge.

And so I'm really sympathetic.

Facilitators can help you too.

You know, you might be able to get a facilitator to at least live stream like the, this is their 10 points or something like that.

Because again, we're here to like help make stuff happen and to, you know, find if there are barriers, like,

anxiety or bandwidth issues around recording is how do we make that happen?

And, you know, to find a way over an obstacle, around an obstacle, under an obstacle, straight through an obstacle.

It doesn't matter.

We're here to navigate, help you navigate obstacles.

And I know that has been like just a huge, huge thing for me.

It's just like, you know, a year ago,

Like I'm constantly turning in my facilitator intro videos as late as possible because I'm still driven by like, what am I going to say?

Who cares what I'm going to say for 15 minutes?

So it's totally, and like Sean is constantly like, yeah, Jen.

So that'd be really great if you could get that.

So yeah, I'm super sympathetic, is sympathetic to the anxiety.

And there's a whole suite of other reasons why like recording might not work for somebody or for a group.

just let us know we'll work it around because if you want to share your awesome team stuff, and again, some teams don't want to share at all because, and they've got reasons for that.

But if you want to share, but then whatever channels that we have for sharing, aren't working for you, we'll find a way to make it happen.

So just make sure people keep the lines of communication open and, you know, come and find me, come and find another facilitator.

There's been, you know, like there's,

couple people have been around and a lot of new people and So it's it's just a great crew of people I find that if you are Not sure kind of how to the you know where to go is that in that cafe space like people like to hang around the coffee maker If you're looking to join or start up a conversation go find that little central area of a cafe and

And cause there's always somebody hanging around the coffee maker.

Like, you know, and it's like, like that space, everybody understands as an open, anybody can join in and say anything they want.

Like, you know, maybe the couches are a little more like we have a subject that we want to talk about, but that, that coffee making area is definitely kind of evolved.

It's, it's just a free for all and in a, in a positive, good way.

Cause everybody's super respectful about taking turns.

because we have the opportunity for things to be simultaneous and chaotic and that just hasn't been happening.

So come find the coffee maker and find who's there and who's a facilitator to help you with any questions.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, Jen.

Sean, and then I have a question from the chat.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.

One quick thing I want to say is if you want to share, and that's an if, right?

If your team wants to share, and video is the default we're trying to experiment with, right?

But you don't have to create a video.

We will work with you on any way you want to communicate.

If you want to be on the live stream and have a conversation with us, that's fine.

If you want to do live Q&A, that's fine.

If you want to share a presentation, that's fine.

If you want to give us an image, we'll share that.

Anything, literally any way you want to communicate, we will accommodate.

Just send at complexityteam on Keybase, and we'll work with you.

Last thing there, Dan's question.


SPEAKER_01:
One is, John has written a funny joke set up.

How many complexity scientists does it take to screw in a light bulb?

Maybe we can think about it, we can write a question or answer in chat, but I'd like to raise up this awesome question from the chat.

do you or will you have a role or a system for folks who don't want to be part of a team but are willing to be beginner's mind mentors advisors feedback givers users etc so i have a thought on that but sean i see your hand raised so go for it and then i'll give a thought


SPEAKER_02:
I think the other thing I'd say is it's up to the teams as to what relationships they want to have.

And so you can definitely offer that as something maybe even on the Jamboard, say, this is something I want to provide for teams.

I personally don't want to join a team in this cycle, but I'm willing to be this resource.

And then the teams can say, we need users to go through our system and give feedback, or we need an advisor.

There's so many different roles and relationships that teams can create, and it's up to them to define these relationships.

Jim?


SPEAKER_01:
Yep.

Jen first, and then I'll give a thought.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, it's 100%.

I'd say also, you know, hang out in the cafe.

I haven't checked.

I'm going to go to the bar space, too, and see if we're using the bar space.

There used to be a bartender, and I feel like hanging out behind the bar...

might be a good vibe for me, you know, get away from the coffee maker and go hang out behind the bar.

So make sure we're utilizing all of our social spaces together.

But, you know, just, yeah, being in the public spaces, I think is a good opportunity for like, oh, what are you doing?

You know, and then you can just start a conversation going like, oh, you know, there's so many interesting teams and I don't really want to join one.

But I'd be really interested in doing a little bit of advising or just checking out what somebody is doing and giving them feedback.

And you'll find people there too.

So I think there's multiple channels for being able to find whatever role is going to work for you.

And it's your weekend.

So we're here to make things happen for you.

There's not...

Oh, well you flunked complexity weekend.

You know, it's, it's, you know, it's like, what do you want to make out of it?

And, and, and, you know, it's this great open creative space.

So yeah, let's connect you with people, you know, so that there's the, the, the, you know, the connections and the, the flows to make stuff happen.


SPEAKER_01:
So here's, here's my thought on that.

For some reason, I just got a weird feedback, but okay, it's gone.

So,

Those roles, which were extremely expertly linked by Leon, beginner's mind, mentor, advisor, feedback giver, user, these are spirits and energy that we hope everybody could cultivate in their own way.

So those are some of the most special roles.

Will we develop a system to make this more and more clear?

We really hope so.

To have a title or an understanding or a way of working that increasingly respects these roles.

So I don't have a specific title for that.

There's no token, there's no NFT for that yet, but maybe there will be.

Now, what can that kind of a person be?

they can be so many things to so many teams because just saying in general or in I need a team or an explore channel like hey I'm kind of new to Quantum but I'm so curious that I have a few hours this weekend to be that sounding board to be that when you're saying you want to learn how to communicate biomimicry like can you communicate to me because I'm curious and I want to be on the other side of that conversation and so those are really special roles and

There's no one best way or one any way to be a participant.

So a team that's composed of

You know, Sean has introduced this sort of Dungeons and Dragons, like different roles, you know, the bard and the wizard, the sorcerer, all these different fun roles.

And there's so many different knowledge, traditions and games to draw on.

And I'm totally seeing a way in which each one of these are able to be the difference in a team that moves that blockchain, data science, sociology, law discussion.

How are we going to bring it forward?

maybe with one of these pieces so all i could say is get involved participate on our tooling on keybase and gather and just to whatever extent you're ready to show up and communicate that clearly i'm around for the next hour and if anybody wants to like test out their five minute pitch i'm there

or if anybody wants a little bit of red teaming, or if anybody wants a challenge to their idea, if anybody is saying that accessibility and inclusion are part of their project, but they're not sure how that's going to come into play.

Like, I'm not going to shoot you down.

I want to build you up and I want you to come talk to me.

Those are all such powerful things that an individual who sees those opportunities can do because the truth is not everyone sees those opportunities.

So it's really special when somebody does see that opportunity and sees a discussion happening, rapid fire in Keybase or wakes up in the morning and sees that 60 chat messages happened in Explore Economics.

Whoa, I think it's time for a beginner's mind.

I need to take a step back.

Like, you know, I use money, but I need to...

get caught up on what you all are talking about here.

Those are special roles.

So I think the biggest answer possible is we want to encourage whatever affordance, whatever opportunity someone sees as that would be fun.

That would be impactful.

That would be including to innovate.

That would be serving through deep time.

Those are your special opportunity where the light is breaking through for you.

And that's how you're going to contribute to a healthy team, healthy relationship, healthy community of practice.

Cool.

Fun times.

Great comments in the chat too.

I won't read all of them, but it's fun.

And we already have great comments on the joining a team side.

So for people who are looking for a person who wants to join their team, this is great.

So we see everything from...

Interested in governance topics, simulation, agent-based modeling, engineering.

These are all great skills.

Rich pictures, collective problem solving, cognitive science, building applications.

I can give coding and Python product development experience.

These are the kind of things...

people pay a lot of money for.

They search the world around for the opportunity to connect with this skillset.

And what you're doing when you connect in a community of practice is more than just connecting with a skillset.

You're connecting with maybe somebody who's already aligned on some of these values and purpose and guidelines and complexity terminology.

That's really special.

Somebody who showed up, somebody who was active when you were active,

That's something that you can't just find on Craigslist.

You can't just find it through a Google search.

And so hopefully people will really take these both sides of the table here seriously because they're very valuable opportunities, both sides, left and right here.

Anything else to add here or would you like to move a little bit forward?

We can move.


SPEAKER_02:
I'm looking at the number of people on the live stream and it's definitely a fraction of people out there doing things.

And so watch this when you get a chance and come to this Jamboard and let's keep populating.

I'll keep pushing it in Keybase because this is just a great interface for that give take of team and participant.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, there's actually just one Jamboard link for all of the sort of bathtub, bookshelf,

live streams that we're doing there's just one link so every time that you'll see the organizers with our awesome facilitators on a live stream we're using the same url just like the way that we use the same single source of truth for the program and then we update that as things change if they change when they change well this is the one url for the jamboard and we're going to make it really accessible so that not all of you are watching right now but know that if you're hearing these words

You should have access to the URL.

You should check out the 16th slide because you'll find people who are on both sides of the table here.

So that's really special to see.


SPEAKER_02:
I'm adding it to the program right now, literally right next to the live stream URL.

So it'll be right there in the program.


SPEAKER_01:
Great.

Great.

Anything else on 16 or do you want to push forward?

Cool.

So let's go to community support and we can just chill for a couple more minutes.

We can walk through a few more slides and we'll end whenever we feel like ending.

So on the 17th slide, we have a community support tab.

And this is like, again, a sort of orange and blue dichotomy.

I can give and then I'm looking for.

So what are any of you interested in providing and then what are any people seeking?

There's also the opportunity to add this information to the participant information tab in the program for participants.

but also we're already seeing like people who out of deep generosity and skill, seeing an opportunity to provide different things for the community.

So that's really special to see because one thing I've heard is like that the success and the health of a community is when other things within that community spin up.

New relationships, new teams, new deliverables, even sub communities.

So these are all really special to see.

We have facilitator Vanessa, willing to create a project on socio-ecological systems.

Go to the I need a team tag in the key base chat.

Vanessa, thank you for the very clear messaging and for helping remind people that they'll learn more about your project as well as other projects by going to that channel.

We have facilitator Squasha, using partner drawing to facilitate your team.

brainstorm, visual, riff, explore new approaches.

So that sounds like Squasha doesn't necessarily want to get in there and tell you what to do or decide what to focus on for your team.

But does your team want to have a 30-minute or a 60-minute fun art time, connect a little differently?

Okay, you've been partner coding and you've been talking on Gather.

How about draw?

Connect a different way.

See if you can find a new way to be creative and to connect while you're synchronously around.

That's really fun.

And also this slide is something we've had at each of our heartbeats.

And that's been really awesome to see how each of the heartbeats people are always looking for things and looking to provide things as well.

Cool.


SPEAKER_03:
And there's a lot of...

underutilized expertise going on out there.

So I know I've talked to people who are looking for teams and they're like, oh, well, and then they'll list like six things that they're like conceivably into.

So I know there's a lot of givers out there.

And I think that if you populate this, I'm looking for it, you're going to find that people are coming out of the woodwork going like, oh yeah, I do a little bit of that.

And I do a little of that.

So, you know, I think it's such an awesome, like, giving community.

So, you know, and again, going back to, like, I may have limited time, but I can give blank.

So I think that as we get this, I'm looking for populated.

I know on the previous slide, like, someone was like, I need a coder to kind of, like, expand out their team.

I think it's going to be, this is like, you know, kind of like where things get super duper exciting.

So in past Complexity Weekends, and I'm not on the schedule, but I'll probably show up for office hours tomorrow morning.

The Sunday morning office hours are, you know, when people are trying to get stuff together for the closing ceremony is super interesting.

I actually love facilitating during that time because it's a real opportunity.

Like, because it's usually like, you know, the number of times I've had like the

we have this really cool shared idea and we're like at loggerheads with each other, you know, like we can't, we don't know how to move forward.

And so, yeah, so it's, it's, you know, you know, the Saturday night team formation stuff and like what, you know, getting people, um,

working together and the teams that have already formed, like, you know, as you said, like we don't necessarily see everything that's going on, but I always find the Sunday morning office hours to be super interesting and really rewarding for me in terms of being able to like, you know, help get these like, okay, we do have an immediate pressing problem of, we would like to have a deliverable for the closing ceremony.

and kind of how do we get there and whether it's a resource that's needed or just like, okay, let's talk this through one more time.

And so it's always great.

Cool, Sean.


SPEAKER_02:
I think one difference between this slide and the previous slide is the previous slide was really about your team composition.

It's we need a new role to fill out our team, or I want to be on a team and have that kind of commitment to a group of other people and have that shared purpose.

This slide is more about the atomic gives and takes.

This is the real benefit to being in a community of practice.

We are just here in this pro-social environment

support each other.

The post-its that end up on this slide don't have to be huge things.

They could be, I'm here for an hour if you need me.

I can look in my network and see if there's some sort of connection I might be able to provide your team.

These are the gives that just make this an amazing community for everyone and that makes us want to have our teams in this community.

Don't take this slide so seriously as far as

I need to have some serious commitments before I put a post-it or anything.

It's like, what are the small things that you yourself are really good at and super easy for you that would be a huge help to someone in the community?


SPEAKER_01:
Also, the future is aspirational.

We hope for the best for ourselves, our relationships, teams, community, broader ecosystems.

What can you give today?

I can give...

time to give feedback but then let's think deep time we're going to be using this slide okay it might look a little different but we're going to be using this slide in six months for the next weekend in six years for complexity weekend 2027 and we're gonna be asking the same types of questions so how can we make that happen how can we scaffold your development so that

What do you want to ask for in 2027?

What do you want to give then?

And how are you going to get there?

How are you going to be facilitated or catalyzed in getting there?

I mean, in 2027, I want to be able to give seed funding to exciting projects who are in countries outside of the United States.

And I'm going to be really looking for a graphical design in people who have experience communicating without using language.

Okay, it sounds awesome.

I would love to get there.

But those are the kinds of things that we want to sort of get going and get warmed up because this is not just about this one live stream with the dozens of you or however many are watching at this moment.

This is about signaling through deep time to a broader community of practice.

So that's pretty fun to look at.

let's maybe flip to 18 in the closing minutes here and then we'll let you get back together and head over to sean's session head over to all these awesome sessions that will be happening and this is again something where we're going to get a few post-its up here in the next couple of minutes but it's something that people will look back on later and it's that one jamboard url that people will be looking at so what kinds of participant behaviors and norms can help help us

make complexity weekend in amazing space.

And there's a, uh, an orange things that we do want to see on the left and then a blue things we want to avoid on the right.

So Jen, I'd be happy to hear your first thoughts either side.

Um,


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, other side.

So I think for, let's start with the positive and things that we want to see.

I mean, we've, we've touched on it so many times is open heart, you know, positive, assuming best intentions.

And, you know, because, you know, we are talking about a lot of times, you know, big, you know, projects that can be really impactful in the world.

You know, these are kind of like dangerous ideas and,

away and so we can have really strong feelings about them and and people do make mistakes and maybe don't have the whole picture from where they are and so you know just assuming this best intent and and

you know, and creating an opportunity with going like, you know, hey, maybe even think about things in this way.

I think that's always something that we wanna see and, you know, definitely not any sort of snobbery.

I think the things we wanna avoid is, you know, kind of like, you know, things can get clubby, particularly in parts of tech.

And, you know, so, you know, anything that excludes people or pushes people out,

think is just always though where we want to avoid things it because you know we're interested in making connections so I think if you are of the mind that you don't need to make connections with certain people you are going to be limiting your experience and

I mean, overall, I think it detracts from the whole experience and it's never been a problem so far to the best of my knowledge.

But I think it's something that we're vigilant about and, you know, want to make sure if people don't talk about an issue the same way you do, because maybe they're not an expert in that and they've been coming at it from a different, you know, perspective, then just be okay with that.

I mean, you don't have to, you know,

find a common space where you can talk.

I knew there was a blog that I was reading a while ago.

It's about a physicist who is like needed some extra money.

And so he just like, you know, threw out on his, his, you know, vanity webpage, like basically we'll do physics consultations, you know, like a hundred bucks for an hour.

And so like, you know, all sorts of armchair amateur physics stuff.

you know fans we just like they were just like i've got this idea and i want to you know and he was like a professor he was just looking to make a little money on the side and so he actually the blog was about his experience of working with people who were not experts who weren't in like completely uh immersed in the jargon of his field and and how it made him um uh better explaining stuff and that you know that in that one example a lot of times their ideas were

exploring spaces that physics had moved on from.

that were current maybe when somebody was in school.

But it was the being able to speak across domains and meet different people actually became this incredibly valuable experience that fed back into his physics practice.

And, you know, in kind of taking things, you know, to working with students and working with other colleagues to the next level.

So I think that that's the, you know, the reason why we want to think about making sure that we don't,

get exclusive because somebody doesn't meet some sort of standard that we think that we have and um because it really that has opportunities to add for us as well and you know just don't be a dick

So, sorry.


SPEAKER_01:
You know me.

Yep.

I had a few things you added there, Jen.

Thanks a lot.

We see on the things we want to see, curiosity and positive vision.

And then on the left side, you know, the carrot and the stick.

What's the stick?

Well...

don't want to see competition and there's almost two um there's two lanes for that there's what can we do as organizers well we don't set it up as a competition we don't have an official judgment we don't have a rubric we don't grade we don't compete we don't rank so that's what we do as organizers but how do we take that from being a structural principle

to being a cultural vibe.

And that's where we really rely on the facilitators and the participants who are everyone

overly negative criticals of others ideas i mean again if we knew which ideas would be needed to come into play to solve some of the world's toughest problems and make it work on diverse teams well then please if you know tell us because we're here to help find that out so it's a great point that we don't want to be too negative or critical if somebody says

Shoot me down here.

I'm about to throw out something.

Great.

You know, load up those guns.

But if someone says, this is the first time I've shared this in public.

Okay.

So that's a hint that you might want to play gently and build them up.

And that's always where I think about yes ands.

Okay, there's a great point in the chat.

It's written, it can be hard for folks with domain expertise to speak to those who don't understand their field as deeply.

It's their entire world, but I understand that's not inclusive.

How does one overcome this on both sides?

So let's think about two sides of the coffee table.

One person has super deep domain expertise.

They're in the middle of that silo.

It's blockchain, it's genomics, it's law, it's whatever.

And on the other side of the table, on the other side of the latte, there's a person who's just learning.

So Jen, what would you say to both of those people, either together or privately?


SPEAKER_03:
Right.

So, you know, sometimes we do want to be in spaces where we can just talk to other people that are inside of our community.

And that could be on a lot of different ways is the, the, the being without explaining thing.

And that could be, you know, I want to talk to other former bike messengers because, you know, like, you know, we have a Facebook group because, you know, we don't, we don't, there's so much that we don't need to explain.

We just, we've all done it.

We know it.

And, um, uh,

You know, so that you can kind of move on from this knowledge.

So there is a value to being within a community where you don't have to explain things.

But, you know, a lot of times that's not really where we're at right now.

So what we're talking about is how we build these bridges.

You know, I'm lucky enough to be an instructor where I get to introduce students.

who have a lot of ideas about archaeology.

And then they come to my class and, you know, I've, you know, how do you feel like the, you know, space aliens built the, you know, or directed the construction of the pyramids?

And, you know, when that's like the first week of class and you got a whole quarter and like, you know, you don't want to be,

Like, you misunderstood that.

I'm like, oh, but the pi.

And I'm like, well, actually, a wheel is a really great way to measure things.

And that's why pyramids all are multiples of pi on the base.

And, yes, it took us a while to figure that one out.

But, no, it doesn't need aliens.

And kind of like, let's unpack some of these ideas about aliens.

No, but it's, you know, this is like a, you know, we live in a world where, you know, people...

are exploring ideas about archaeology through the Discovery Channel and through YouTube videos, and then they come to college, or they meet me in a bar or whatever, like we've been in those in a while.

And so, you know, it's not my job to just be like, oh.

it's my mind to be like, okay.

And it's like, it's, you keep on saying yes.

And it's that's improv, right.

It's to be like, well, that's really interesting.

How did you get there?

Well, actually, uh, you know, not, well, actually, cause that's always such a loaded phrase, but like, Hey, you know, it's really easy to do to measure is to have a wheel that rolls with a mark on it.

And then, you know, uh, how many, you know, rotations and it's a really great, you know, measuring device.

And then you kind of let people marinate on that and think about it.

And then you can kind of tear apart, like we don't actually need space aliens to build any past monuments or any past amazing accomplishments of past people.

And then we can really start building on the amazingness of like what people have accomplished in the past with a completely different set of tools and then move together into the future.

And so I think that, you know, while we're talking about this conversation about building bridges is to not be dismissive of where people are coming from because that turns people off.

And, you know, as I said, like there's never been a class and I teach beginners all the time where I didn't go, like, there's always a time where I'm like, huh, I'm going to have to research that and get back to you.

So we can be subject matter experts in our own domains, and we're not going to actually even have all of the answers about our own domains.

So we deepen our own expertise when we have to communicate these complex ideas to people who aren't experts.

It helps us think about problems differently when we have to explain them in a way that's appealing to somebody else's eye.

because they don't already come with our expert eye.

So, you know, I like to think about it in terms of, you know, how are we building bridges?

How do we all get there together in a community?

And hopefully, because, you know, we've just gone through all these slides, and I think that's the whole vibe that we're building here.

So, you know, people do, you know, say things that may seem initially a little whack, but there's a kernel underneath it.

And if they're thinking that more

more than one person in the world's thinking that.

And so let's kind of like, like, you know, dig it out a little bit and, and really explore that space.

You know, if you need to be in a place where, where you're only talking to other subject matter experts who already know your jargon, you know, there's ways to do that within complexity weekend, but it's really not the whole vibe that we're doing.

So just think about how we're doing that bridge building.

And yeah,


SPEAKER_01:
Perfect.

Last thoughts, Sean, and then we'll head out for the end.

And I know that you have a session starting right now.


SPEAKER_02:
Sure.

Yeah.

I think the, the key word that I'm thinking of for this is like patience.

And I'm just thinking to a walk.

I went on with my wife Marie and we walked past this little pond and it had this cool little pattern, like a patch of the middle that had some roughness.

Right.

And we were like, Oh, I wonder why that's happening.

Right.

But I've studied a lot of fluid mechanics.

So I was like,

thinking and I was like, okay, what's my intuition telling me?

Well, maybe there's, you know, some sort of flow domain where there's some turbulence in one particular region because the bottom of the pond, you know, has some weird, you know, erratic ground.

And I'm just thinking of like the sheer layers and the momentum transport.

And I'm like, I just want to share, and I just shared it with her.

I'm like, I think it's, you know, this, but then I realized, you know,

I'm really passionate about fluids and thinking about them.

I want to share the biggest kernel I can or the most generic, intuitive reason why, but that's not the place.

It's hard to share that with somebody who's not in that domain.

It's something I really want to share because it's exciting to me to think of what is the essence of what's happening right now.

But I need to have the patience to work up to that.

And on the other side, there's the patience of sometimes just letting them talk about and like talk through some of the words until they get to something more accessible.

I think patience on both sides is really key.


SPEAKER_01:
What a fun conversation.

Jen, thanks so much for stepping up and for being on this live stream.

Sean, awesome work today as well.

We're going to hear from everybody in about 11 hours or nine hours or I don't know.

Check my watch.

But great times.

Those watching live in replay, much appreciated.

We'll see you in Gather.

So see you later.