SPEAKER_01:
Hello and welcome everyone.

This is Synergetic Stream number 16.0 and it is June 12th, 2022.

16 is 4 times 4.


UNKNOWN:
6122022.


SPEAKER_01:
And really happy and excited today to be speaking with Strupey.

This is going to be an open ended conversation.

It's been awesome to connect with you and have conversations.

And this is our first live stream conversation.

So I'll pass it to you for an introduction and we'll take it from there.

So thanks again for joining and please.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, welcome.

Thank you for having me and for inviting me to have this conversation today.

i've been following your live streams not live i must say but following them in the recorded version for a while now and i've greatly enjoyed them as i've been you know soaking in anything synergetic for the last something like four years now um

and yeah it's it's a very beautiful resource i think the the kind of way that you've been digging into the into the script uh and you know looking at it your own way and then um translating it to to the viewers and i'm

also i've i mean i've i've been playing with synergetics as i said for i think i began in 2018 and it completely changed my life like

absolutely because now i'm since then i'm looking actively into how to create the structures that can teach me and others about space time and about what by now we call spherical thinking um i've been drawn into the design science studio

where i've been involved in a project among a few of us that is that we call the fuller feedback systems um and within that nest we've been playing with words and models and all kinds of things and you know it's just been a very beautiful place for me because i'm

very deep into the spontaneous and the playing by heart the thinking out loud and these kinds of things and doing that with a group of people over an extended period of time is just a very very great experience


SPEAKER_01:
So maybe let's just start at the zero frequency layer.

What is spherical thinking and how do we enter it?


SPEAKER_00:
yeah well spherical thinking to me is just another name for synergetics um it is a way of acknowledging the fact that universe itself is spherical in nature and um everything that we experience around us tends to be spherical

with a big I think you say caveat in English which would be to make clear that I'm not speaking of Greek spheres right and so synergetics is really a completely new

If we subscribe to linear time, we don't.

But it's a new story of what geometry is, one that is looking at the experience, the experiential side of things, where all geometry is embodied.

And with that, we gain a different understanding of what it is to be sphere.

and that leads us back to understand that all geometry has to do with the behavior and interplay of spheres and indeed all universe does and even you and i are basically spherical beings like our body is constituted of on a molecular level of

atom atoms being roughly spheres and then you know we go to the molecules and to the cell structure and all the way up and even on our mesocosmic level between you and i i can look at you and your your head is full of spheres you know it's a sphere with spheres in it and um to recognize that is to

widen the understanding of spheres away from the very lifeless Greek ideal of a perfect sphere that we wouldn't find anywhere in universe to one that is a lot more inclusive and embracing of the diversity that comes with life and

If I was to say what a sphere is within my sense of it, I would say a sphere is a membrane constituted by a definite number of vertices that is

like a boundary that binds the inside of this body of the sphere to its outside so signaling to us that a sphere is or anybody is really only whole if we take into view the whole of universe because we're not separate from it we're bound to it by our boundaries

besides that membrane which comes with the convex outside and the concave inside the other thing that is significant to anybody and everybody is that they have a heart a center of gravity and with that in mind you know if we consider a sphere a system of

where all the vertices on the membrane are approximately as bucky said approximately the same distance from an approximate center then you know it it just opens the gate to what i would call the way of the spheres um

which is fun because yesterday you and i were on the trim tap book club and uh i think lionel was reading from bucky's diary a quote where he he actually said he was walking about and after much philosophying he he came up with the theory of the spheres

So he had that, he turned it into synergetics, and I took synergetics and turned it into the way of the spheres.

So I guess it goes full circle.

But that's how it goes, you know, round and round.


SPEAKER_01:
Great.

Well...

Let's keep the sphere in the middle, like a oxygen molecule.

And I want to go two different ways, like a water molecule.

We can contrast the sphere with a cube.

So that's one branch.

And the other branch is right here.

I have a metal sphere and a metal tet.

So these shapes or forms or matter look so different and they feel so different.

the tat I'm fidgeting with it and it's poking me and the sphere feels like it's going to slide out of my hands.

It feels like it's made of Quicksilver.

So on one hand, how is the sphere different from the cubic mode of thinking?

And on the other hand, why do we find the sphere and the tat to be such natural cousins or partners when they feel and, and enact so differently?


SPEAKER_00:
That's a very good question.

And the first thing I think we need to make clear, and I think that is really the central message that was wrapped up in synergetics, is that the Greek geometers were pretty good storytellers.

They invented a whole universe of solids.

and within that they could superficially look at the shapes of the world and say well this is a tetrahedron here's an octahedron here is a hexahedron or cube and so forth but they did not have a structural understanding of the matter so they are defining all of these things as disembodied you know a point has no dimension to it it's nobody

a line goes to infinity a plane is a square and space is without time it's static but the fact of the matter is that set cube has really said here's a cube all right so this is what the the the mental model of a cube looks like translated into the reality of space time and it turns out

it's not a form, it's a transform.

It's not a structure.

We can make it a construct, but by its own right, it's not a structure.

We can transform it into one, like here is the

the equivalent of Kirby's quad ray.

Shout out to Kirby.

Here is one way of holding it at least in one place, and the rest is structured.

And then we could do it like so, and we get that very, well, you call it a tet.

I would call it a four eyes.

We can go deeper into why.

But here, it can also be two of them if I hold it this way.

And in such a way, it's way more structured than within that shape we call a cube.

And if we look around in the universe, we find very, very, very few of these cubes.

Like the very few instances when the universe is doing something that looks like a cube,

it only does so superficially if we tune into those systems we find they are incredibly high complex structures made of um some sort of sphere spherical agglomeration

um and if i wanted to make this a cube making it a structure i would take this which you know doesn't look like much right it's it's kind of like oh here's a square oh not really um it's also a transform but as i connect it up

And by the way, these models are all made of straws, paper straws, and a string running through them.

And some of them, I created some buttons with beads.

And most of them have been upgraded by putting a dowel into them because they

The kids tend to bend the straws.

Oh, what happened?

Something happened.

Suddenly, what I was holding in my fingers there turned into the four eyes, which is a structure.

and if we look at it it's a membrane that is binding an inside to an outside and it has a center of gravity a heart in it so according to the uh the the statement of how i would define a sphere this is actually a sphere

it's the simple most sphere and if we look deeper into what is playing out in in front of us here we find that it actually is the first sphere made of spheres and this we can take and basically plug into the transform of that cube and i can connect up these corners

one by one and as i do something quite magical is happening to that cube which is one by one i'm triangulating the squares of the cube and as i do that they become structural and suddenly we have

a cube but this is a triangulated cube it's a very different one from the one that we have in mind usually and what it what the difference is between this and before is now everything about it is triangles and those are structures

Well, and with that, I think I kind of answered the question.

So to my mind, any time we find something in the universe that appears to be a cube, if we look closely, we find it to be something that spheres are doing.

And it certainly is not the kind of thing we have in mind when we say cube.

because that is only a mental abstraction.

It's an imaginary friend, if you like.

And it's more of a toxic friendship, I think.

Yeah, but it is significant because if we look at the universe, we could make a very clear distinction between what we tend to call nature and human nature.

and you know nature in general universe in general is doing as i say mostly spheres on all scales whereas human nature seems to be predominantly manufactured in the shape of cubes and that is a very strange choice for many many many reasons um yeah so that's how i would

introduce that that distinction and also to to go back to that very smooth

sphere that you were holding out there.

Let me just grab something here.

I've got one of those here, right?

This is very similar to yours, a little smaller.

But this one seems to be almost perfect, right?

But it's really...

because it's got so many corners so many vertices that we do not tell we can't tell them apart anymore and the way i explain this is by reminding us of our you know

as as we are earth as we are universe we are also those mountains growing around us very slowly but as they grow sometimes the water breaks of a rock on the top and that rock comes with very few corners and very few edges and very rough and sharp and then it travels downhill following uh the path of the water

knocking on other rocks along the way meeting them saying hi and knocking off a corner here and a corner there and as they do they grow more and more smooth and more and more round and when we get to the to the seaside and we find the grains of sand they are they are very very round which isn't to say they have no corners but they have a great number of corners

And yeah, that is really the distinction is that the Greek sphere is an idealized perfect thing that we do not find in reality.

supposedly having an infinite number of points all the same radius from the center of gravity and around every point there's 360 degrees and you know that contradicts everything we know from physics in terms of thermodynamics and these kinds of things because such a system does not have any holds to transport or

exchange information and if we do find a sphere that looks very much perfect then it is something that is 10 usually a very high frequency system but it has a definite number of corners and many holes many eyes


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

So just a few of the pieces I note there.

Just like the first planar shape is the triangle, and that's when we go from the two lines to the third line, it encloses space on the plane.

But when we enclose space in our 4D world,

we need the Tet as the minimal shape.

The four eyes is the minimal shape.

And we can also arrive at the Tet from four oranges, four of these stacked next to each other.

Their centers are the four vertices, four vertexes of the Tet.

And then even now I look back down at this and I've touched it and it has started to rub away and even soft in the corners, but there's still a finite amount of material.

And so that was very interesting that by defining the sphere as the membrane with some defined or finite number of vertices,

that is separating or partitioning the inside and the outside, when you have three points in system, you have something triangular and three points make a plane.

then the fourth point is going to break into unless it's co-planar is going to enclose space and make it into a regular or an irregular like different edge lengths um and we're getting awesome great comments in the chat very fun thanks everybody for those


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, wow, there's something going on.

I'm not actually following along the chat here.


SPEAKER_01:
No need to.


SPEAKER_00:
I'm trying to see you on Jitsi and it turns off your camera every now and then.


SPEAKER_01:
And one other connection between the Tet and the idealized sphere, sometimes I think about if it were a membrane like a balloon or like a cell membrane and it were inflated so that the four points still on the edge remained as the furthest out from the heart, but that the sides inflated so that it were like a ball, right?

And just as you had the TET that was triangulating and structuring inside of a cube.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

This one is a little more round than yours.


SPEAKER_01:
oh nice with the beads and just just like how the the the tet was providing structure inside of the cube which by the way anyone who has built even the most rectilinear house why do they always use that cross bracing why do they always omni triangulate and those who work with structure know that there has to be implicit or explicit triangulation yet for some reason

even with the octet truss and the cross brace as accepted architectural elements, still the dominance of the rectilinear architecture remains.

But then I just imagine the Tet as also sort of scaffolding or being the internal cytoskeleton of an idealized sphere that is like billowing in and out.


SPEAKER_00:
and if i may comment on that notion of everyone who made a house or something you know put in those braces or at least if you if someone makes a like even like a if imagine someone made a cube out of steel pipes um and only had the outer edges they would use some kind of

connection in the corners which in the case of steel might be a weld you know if you have something else you might glue it together or something but if one does that they are creating micro triangulation right they are creating a micro triangulated structure in the corner that is able to just so hold the shape

while the whole thing itself is still no structure.

And this is, I think, this points at two things, because one thing is because this has been normalized, right?

That's the term we use for the rectilinear.

It's the normal.

Because of that,

the inverse of the normal is the abnormal, right?

So if I do have this cube here, this construct of a cube, then we would consider in conventional terms these yellow straws here as the normal unit of perception.

This would be a length and then a plane or an area and then a volume.

If we agree on that, as most people do, then we are defining this direction here as abnormal.

We don't call it that.

We call it hypotenuse or we call it the square root of two.

But it's rendered irrational because those two scales, if you like, are incommensurable.

So we have to decide on one of them.

to be our rational frame of reference and the classical the ancient uh babylonian or greek or whoever came up with that system i mean there is ample evidence in the scriptures that this is indeed babylon system um that definition has made us

incapable of using the full potential of universe because we're using a frame where only this uniform cube makes sense and everything else doesn't.

You cannot have a rational triangle or a rational hexagon or a rational circle or any of those things because the frame of reference itself is irrational.

And if we inverse that, and if we say, well, let's turn it the other way around and say this route here, that is the important bit.

Um, then suddenly.

know this side of the cube turns in irrational being i guess square root of a half or something like that but we free our minds from the trap of thinking in that idea of 3d reality which is a construct

and we can normalize or actually not normalize but naturalize this as the unit that we think with and then we have a linear relationship between two spheres which is always a finite relationship it's you know drawn between two centers of gravity we have a planar relationship that is always a triangle

And in my terminology, I would call the specific kind of triangle where everything is identical a left angle, because all the angles are 60 degrees.

And if we call 90 right, why not call 60 left?

But I would also call it an eye, because if I put together three spheres like these, as we just looked at them here, if I put those three together,

can still see you through that eye there is an opening between them there is no surface but there is an opening well and if that is one eye then we can have you know that be the unit of area which makes a whole lot more sense given that space time is curved and spherical

um and then we have a volume with this four eyes which we could call the quantum volume and with that as the rational rational basis which you know is only scientific to go from the simple side and not take something that is incredibly complicated and say this is where it all begins but actually start at the simple side of side of things and with that

all of the other relationships are natural suddenly so even that ratchet cube here suddenly this particular one turns out to have three quanta volume and not something with comma dot and an endless string of numbers but really just three and

you know that in its own should be ample and good reason to to consider this shift

there's so many more good reasons and you know we don't have to go into all of them right now but there can be much and more sad about this including the many more reasons why the cube or the idea of three-dimensional static uniform space and linear time is simply false it's mistaken and it does not even you know hold

hold up to the standards of science as they have developed now.

And I think it's an artifact or a, what's the word?

It's something that has been written into the basic code of civilization at such an early stage, this idea of the Euclidean geometry and all of its derivatives, those things, so deeply written into the base code that it has been axiomatic and agreed upon for centuries and millennia now.

and all the complicated science that we have today is still using that as the as their base line and so do every all the commoners you know all everyone has that common sense of well i live in 3d reality for some reason space is static time is linear and you know this idea of

of solids and all these things is so deeply written into us that you know if someone makes a mistake they go back to square one but that is already two triangles it's at least two


SPEAKER_01:
minimum two but let me add a few notes i think it's very fascinating indeed the normal uh being the the right angle the correct angle is the orthogonal relationship and the unit cube is especially in the last several hundred years

without even going back to several thousand, the XYZ centimeter gram second system, it kind of created like a market peg or an equivalence relationship where the cube with the one centimeter edge length

filled with one gram of water at four degrees C and one kilojoule is how much energy this takes.

And that distance is how much this vibrates at this time.

So many of our measures and sense-making tools of the world are

very much intertwined with some of these priors even before the changes in like the 1800s and it's a very important point that um either the square root of two is going to be irrational

or we can just say that that's one and then yes the edge of the cube is going to be something that is irrational but that's irrational yeah that's how it is and as kirby's notebooks show us

It's a programmer's choice.

It's a chef's choice.

It's artistic license.

There's no need for only relying on one of these modalities, especially in our bridge and transition time.

And then I wanted to come back to one of your examples, and we can return to this discussion, but I want to pick up on one of those examples and take it into a bit of applied synergetics.

So you mentioned a welded cube.

So we were talking about the cross bracing and how many structures are cross braced, whether it's the octet truss or whether it's carpentry and cross bracing.

However, somebody might say, well, you've made that floppy cube

and you're trying to prove a point, but I have this welded cube and, you know, slams it on the table.

Isn't that a cube with integrity?

And then you pointed out, well, actually at the micro structure down to the crystalline structure, there are close packings of spheres and there's relationships that are more consistent with the spherical thinking.

And then that made me think about how our multi-scale system

to coerce it into the cube that has this limited integrity, it causes fractures and schisms.

And so it's like to coerce structure and build this high cost, high fragility structure in the name of what?

Just promoting cubes?

We end up at the welding joints and in the center and on the margins, we end up with this leveraged stress that ends up fracturing the total integrity

um so how might that allegory of the welded cube relate to social tensegrity or the way that we use language and the way we educate and think about synergetics well that's a very small question isn't it um well you know there is so much to be said about this and it's really


SPEAKER_00:
I guess it's as good to go anywhere into this complex of thought.

So if we for once take a step back and we look at all the variety of humanimal existence on the planet, we find that

We have the traditions of civilization, which originate in some of them in the Mediterranean.

Those turned out to be the most dominant over time, civilizing the tribes of Europe.

And then those, a millennium later, went out to civilize the rest of the world.

There is also other civilizations that tend to have this focus on the square and the cube for whatever reasons, but there's also evidence of people that actually have a very different frame of mind.

And one of my preferred examples of such a culture would be

uh some of the the the people the native people of turtle island what now is called the americas and for instance most people know of the tipi right but there's a difference between uh a

cree person setting up a tp and uh was it you you know a white for lack of you know it's not a color thing it's more of a a different frame of mind thing but

these two people would set up the the tp in a different way probably and that would different that difference is that um mccree would go into the forest and cut down the the trees that they need for their structure and they know by cutting down the tree they're killing it they're taking the life of the tree and they acknowledge that and they respect that and when they take this tree

And they set up first to make that tipi, they set up a tripod.

And those of us who are familiar with the four eyes know that's sort of a four eyes, one that is complemented by the ground creating the fourth eye.

But they do so.

with very much care that the place where the three legs of the tripod meet, something happens that in synergetics we would call turbining.

The Cree call it the nest.

And I got a model here which kind of shows that.

what i'm speaking of which is always helpful because words fall so short unless we're very familiar with what we're talking of and in here you might just see a knot in the middle of this structure and looking at it this way you kind of see those three dowels going in and they pass by one another in a kind of a dance where they go like that but there's no hierarchy in that

And that is where the Crees say when they do that, the spirit of the trees comes back and re-inhabits the structure.

So to contrast that, most European-rooted people, European-minded people would set up a tripod going first across

making a cross with two and laying the third one on top of that.

And that is without pattern integrity in terms of synergetics.

It's without minding what is happening on the structural level.

And it's also manufacturing a hierarchy because you have two that support a third.

And this is kind of,

symptomatic I would say of many of the things that Europeans for lack of you know there's so many

so many ways we could label this we could say just for for this conversation the box people the box people would um build a house you know like in the old days over here in europe they would start with a timber frame in many places depending on the local resources um a timber frame and the carpenters

they would set up the square thing first, and then they would put the cross beams in second.

And in my tongue, in German, that cross beam is called .

And therefore, we could say the person putting it in is ,, which is the word we have in our tongue for someone who's the kind of person who's in school and doing

always a little more than was asked just to become better right there is a connotation there that isn't really nice so in a way what this implies is that putting in the cross brace is doing a little more than what would be necessary when the carpenters themselves have a saying which is um

The quadrilateral dissolves while the triangle remains.

And in such ways, there is a deep understanding that we do need the triangles to make something last.

We need the cross bracing in the Ikea shelf after putting these heavy-ass square boxes together

It's the little triangle that holds it in place.

But all of that comes with a high price in more than one way.

One of those ways is by doing that, by first setting up the box and then bracing it, we are

bringing into that structure a rigidity that is unnecessary and oftentimes dangerous in case of an earthquake, for instance.

But we're also investing vast amounts of energy and material to create something that is not necessary.

Why do I say that?

I'm kind of looking for this here.

OK, so check this.

When I made this particular model, this one I showed you, I had originally these yellow straws at the same length as these ones of the four eyes.

Just imagine we were standing in front of a forest, and we wanted to make a house.

And we do need the cross braces, and that's the length the trees grow in.

And we cannot go longer than that.

So if we want to make a box, we cannot make the box as long as those trees because we need the cross braces.

Those need to be longer.

So that's the tree size.

And we cut it to get to the size of the square, the cube.

But that gives us leftovers.

And I got the leftovers of that cube here.

And I turned the very same dozen straws

into this, which is a structure in its own right.

This is the eight eyes.

And this is a very tiny eight eyes, but it's a lot more strong and stable than the cube would ever be.

However, if we were to take a look at the eight eyes, if we did not cut the trees, the straws in the first place, because we were just going to make an eight eyes instead of a cube, we could have taken the full length of the trees

and turn those into the eight eyes.

And by doing so, let me just put these together.

See how adding connections triangulates this and makes it more and more stable while not being rigid at all.

This is completely dynamic, not static and lifeless.

and certainly no inanimate matter.

This is animate matter or any matter.

And now putting in the last connection here, here is our eight ice.

And this one has the same relative size as this four ice.

And it turns out the quantum volume of that eight ice is actually four quanta, while this cube here is only three quanta.

And that is stuff, you know, people who know synergetics may have understood this.

I hope they do.

But most people have no understanding of this at all, and they wouldn't even know what this could mean.

But what it does mean is every time we decide on the neutral uniform cube, we're deciding to disintegrate and to create waste.

because we could have taken those straws and gotten more volume out of them.

Without the additional structure inside, this could have been that.


SPEAKER_01:
If I could just comment, I think that's very consistent with doing more with less than thinking about two ways that the compressive elements could be in contact, like whether we make them all come to one point at the top and then just glue that together, duct tape that together, or whether you described like crossing two and crossing the third.

the turbine or the nest allows there to be heterogeneity in the material and gives it a little play and so it's like it allows this structural integrity through pattern integrity and then the demonstration with the quanta coming into the shape it's like where did the quanta go how did the spirit

enter the eight eyes where did it go in the cube where was it squeezed out and that is so important when we're thinking about how to do more with less and how to make a world that works for everyone and make enclosures yes of society that do work for everyone yes and you know the i i love the quote with doing more with less this whole idea of ephemeralization but it's also necessary to keep in mind that


SPEAKER_00:
We are currently doing the opposite.

The conventional systems, whether they are monocultures on the fields or monocultures in the heads, they lead us to do way less with way more.

Hence, having an Earth Day in April where we've just used up all the resources that planet Earth can regenerate in a year, and then there's month to go, right?

All of that is a consequence of this very, very, very senseless framework.

And I do agree when you said, like Kirby says, we can make that choice if we know about it, first thing.

We can make that choice only if we're instructed or informed about this.

But I believe it is high time that we actually stop

considering how can we think outside the box and realize there is no box.

We do not need to think with boxes at all.

We can really let that come to rest and wholeheartedly embrace all of the stuff that Bucky has really left us with.

And if we do that, I think whatever flavor of human or humanimal experience or craft or sport or thinking or science or art or whatever it is that people are doing, they can do it with a new framework.

And they will be surprised by the outcome of it because the simple choice of saying, you know, I go back

beyond square one to triangle one and start there, that simple decision is where we invite the spirit back.

And everything we do within that framework begins with the whole and never breaks it apart, but only complements it and makes it more whole.

And if we do that, we have the integrity of the whole of universe on our side.

And we also

gain synergy along the way on every step of the way.

And that is something, you know, I don't think we have a we need to shift to renewable energies as much as shift to synergy.

If we do that, we do not depend on as much energy anymore because, yeah, there is incredible amounts of waste currently

mindlessly being produced because people do not know synergy they don't know any of this stuff i think and yeah there's a very beautiful simple example for that in terms of applied synergetics which also has some kind of um resonance with

What the Greek said about these shapes and what they really are, I just might need another model for that.


SPEAKER_01:
I'll make a note while you look for another model.

Yes.

i really enjoyed the the transition from outside the box thinking think outside the box to there is no box or something else with similar sense because from outside the box there's no spoon indeed um spoon is sphere because outside the box thinking it's an implicit reification of the box it's like saying you can leave

the box, we'll be right here doing most of our thinking inside the box.

So whether you're inside or you're outside, the reification is of the box.

And then just on one personal note, and we can talk more about biology later, it reminded me of studying genetics in undergrad and asking, well, what is a gene?

And that pushed me on and on and on in genetics until they said, all right,

That's in philosophy now.

Now that's philosophy of biology.


SPEAKER_00:
It's like... You've left the box.


SPEAKER_01:
You get higher level of the box until you're outside the box.

And then they say, well, now you're in a different field.

You're in a different cereal box on the shelf.

And instead, we could have just had a different partitioning of questions and practices such that that mystery around, for example, what is a gene or other kernel questions like that,


SPEAKER_00:
become part and parcel of the actual field rather than the bright line or the shibboleth that people use to test who's a true believer in this one way of thinking yes i i agree completely and i think you know i wanted to make this point earlier but i got sidetracked but you know if we look at the normal life of a civilized person

they are born and more often than not nowadays they are not even born naturally but they are born at least in a traumatic environment for the mother or even most often now they are born through a c-section which takes away the whole thing of going through drawing out of them the womb into the world which you know

if we look at the flower it doesn't really help if you if you help the flower by opening you know it doesn't help the process of opening the flower if we do it um but if someone someone is taken out of the wound in that way they're put into an incubator and there's the first box i mean the hospital was a box too but

There's your own little box.

And then most people spend all their life in boxes.

From literally the houses they're in, to the books they read, to the images they look at, all the screens they look at, everything is boxes.

And they say it's neutral, it's normal.

It's not.

And then after a whole life of boxes, we die, and then we're buried in a box, right?

No escape.

But

There is always, there has always and will always be those people who do not conform with the uniform.

They don't.

Because, well, we're spherical people.

I think all of us have spherical minds.

It's like we've been conditioned with an operating system which

drastically reduces the capacity of our minds to work along the boxes.

But we all have a spherical mind that is running this operating system.

That way around it can be done.

We can hold the box in place if we are mindful of the actual framework that underlies it.

It's just half the story has never been told.

this side of reality is ignored ignored it's you know actively put aside and yeah I think now that I got the model ready I could just show you quickly what I was

uh the the i the one thing where synergy is very clear and it's a very beautiful example of how applied synergetics can really make a difference

particularly now in our present day and time so the greek geometry which is you know come to us both in the way of pure mathematics pure geometry but also sacred geometry it's i think it's the same tradition it might be the the

There was a different one with the Pythagoreans and their tetractys.

I think that was a lot more synergetic.

But the one that most people are familiar with, with the platonic solids and that stuff, is identical, I think, to the sacred geometry.

It's just one is even more esoteric than the other.

But within that,

frame of mind they say this is a tetrahedron and they identify the tetrahedron with the element of fire because well if you do make a fire you put the wood on the ground you burn it and the flames go up and everything goes up into the air and then in the end we're left with ashes right so everyone thinks that's how a fire works

no fireworks no pun intended however what happens if we turn this thing upside down or downside up or whatever the other way around suddenly we have a synergetic fire not an energetic one the differences are stark

because now we have something that collects the fuel that we throw into it.

It doesn't disperse it.

It's safe from the wind while still drawing in air to breathe.

And well, there's a few more things, but the most significant is we get a fire that does not burn to ashes.

Why is that?

Well, if we have flames in here, if we have wood in here that burns, what is happening is the fire itself is the glowing of the wood, which turns to ember and then glows where oxygen goes in.

And then the spirit of the wood, which is the gases and these things, emerges and burns as a flame as long as oxygen is provided.

But because of the shape of this, the surface of the fire is always bigger than the level below, which is to say, while it draws in air to breathe, the oxygen goes into the flames right away and does not actually go into the embers.

So contrary to the conventional fire where we're grounded, we're based on the ground and we're pointing to the atmosphere, taking what was grown from the ground and burning it into the air.

On this way, we're taking what was taken from the universe.

You know, all those plants have been synergizing sunlight into matter all their life into structure.

And we put that in here and

the structure doesn't disappear.

Only the gases go to the atmosphere while the embers keep glowing.

So over time, this fills up with embers.

And in the end, when you have it full, you can decide whether you want to leave it on and just have it cool down or quench it.

And if you do quench it,

You get activated charcoal, which you can put into your compost to create terra preta, which is the most fertile soil we have.

And by that simple shift, we go from burning the whole fuel into atmosphere, you know, releasing all the carbon to one where only a third of the carbon is released.

while two-thirds of it remain as the structure of the the biochar that goes back into the ground to you know to nurture the soil to uh hold onto nutrients to be habited for microorganisms all of that good stuff and it's really just that right and

it's that is one thing everyone could be doing if they so choose and they would all be generating regenerating uh the very soil that is the the the ground that we have grown from um instead of wasting it and you know have it have it all burn and become a nightmare


SPEAKER_01:
Let's stay on this elemental theme.

One topic that we had talked about via chat was this concept of sea worthiness, both to sea and to be at sea.

in different domains or different areas so what does seaworthiness mean or look like or feel like on land in the air at sea and in spaces like digital spaces or in mental or cognitive spaces and what do we learn about the shape of things from each of these domains well


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, we've come across this notion of seaworthiness because I've been looking into Marlinspike seamanship for a while.

I've been actively looking for the simple most ways of creating synergetic structures since I got to know about them, because in the first place, I did not know them at all.

I read the books full of explanations, synergetics, and were like, whoa, all of this.

all of this is absolutely logical that makes perfect sense but i have no experience none with these structures but it couldn't be so hard to make them if this stuff is true so i went out to find ways of doing that and among them is one where if you have something like branches then you know you can tie them together with rope using simple knots

um and without drilling holes in the wood or doing any harm to it you can tie that wood together into these structures

to create shelter to create living uh dynamic structures to to live with um and that you know re kindled a long-lasting love of mine for all things fabric and uh weaving and knotting and these kinds of things you know i've been down

the needle binding road for a while and all kinds of things and I've recently come across this term of the Marlin spikes human ship because I've got a Marlin spike now which is the this kind of tool which makes it very easy to

tighten tense knots and also to unknot the knots and to splice you know talking of jeans that is the Marlin spike and

it gave name it gave its name to a whole craft which is the tying of knots and all the stuff that has to do with rope works and sailing and these things and there is still a few people who know these crafts but they've the the high time of that is long gone um however

I think synergetics itself is clearly informed by knowledge of the seas.

Like Baki was a sea person, clearly.

He grew up around the sea, on the sea, in the sea.

And he went to the Navy, which opened his mind to a more global perspective and all these things.

and he clearly saw the relationships between what he called synergetics and these arts and well i've i've been realizing that too like if you look into marlon spike seamanship you'll find it's completely

100% synergetic.

It's like one of those ancient crafts of synergy that have never been named that, but clearly express the knowledge of pattern integrity and structure and tension and these things used to create vessels that are seaworthy.

so vessels that are capable of carrying people and loads across the sea now for most of us we're we're born and raised on land and the sea is something alien and strange even though it's like three quarters of the planet and to Bucky

he realized with his Dymaxion map that actually there's only one ocean and one continuous chain of land.

But he also, when he realized there's only one ocean, to his understanding, it's not just the ocean of water, it's also the air ocean.

And that hints at the fact that

we could very well indeed create seaworthy structures on land, particularly now that the air ocean is getting more and more vicious in response to our mindless waste of energy.

integrity over time um you know many many many many people are fall fall victim to earthquakes for instance or to hurricanes or whatever stuff you know floods all kinds of things

and all of that is because they built their homes thinking well the ground is solid you know it's not changing we can build a firm foundation and then have all these building blocks that we put on top that and then we get a castle of our own

But many of the traditional crafts of making houses are a lot more resilient.

Many people for a long time have been living on houses that sit on poles, for instance.

They don't mind the water rising.

They just get longer poles.

And I think this whole idea of the Dymexian house and the geodesic dome and all of that

All these ideas that Bucky had to address the need of people for shelter and housing is informed by the sense that you can't escape the ocean.

While the landlubbers tried to defy gravity with the houses they built, they would do much more wisely if they embraced gravity, if they actually knew what it is.

And they integrated gravity in everything they did.

then all the structures we did would be seaworthy and they wouldn't mind the shaking ground the rising waters or the strong winds because that would just be a tickle you know it would be something that makes you move a little and dance a bit but it wouldn't break you down because you've been rigidified and in that sense

I believe that we can turn it this way or that.

But really, again, if we were to say, and that's what I decided for myself, I will not think in boxes anymore.

I recognize they aren't true.

They aren't there.

So I'm going to go full into the other thing and see where that takes me.

and in my life it takes me to create furniture and structures that slowly progress into what i call a hex house but also many other things that i can use for my day-to-day life

and oftentimes you know i'm using the simple most tools and materials that are readily available without doing much to them and i create these things and i think that is generally true for whatever we are doing like as an example if we are talking virtual reality right something like

computer graphics.

Back in the day, all blocks, everything looked weird, like pong.

And then there was a major change when the first time the graphics went triangles, and suddenly it was much more lifelike.

But up to this day, when we speak of those virtual realities, we call them 3D.

Why?

Well, because the computer program

is defining the playground in which we are creating that virtual reality as a three-dimensional system.

So there is X, Y, and Z, and everything is normalized that way.

But as I said earlier, if we do that, we're irrationalizing the triangle.

So now we have incredibly sophisticated computers that can do calculations that, you know,

far out.

And most of the calculation capacity goes into rounding.

rounding all those many they call them polygons but really triangles because every single triangle is irrational and for every single one the computer has to decide i'm going to take it to that many places beyond the the the dot and then i'm going to round it well you know if the computers were trained otherwise in for instance the quadray system then

It would be round from the beginning.

It would be beginning with the whole of universe and would organize everything four-dimensional as universes, which is to say all the triangles are rational, all of them.

And then, I mean, first thing is the computers would be free to not only render the surface, not only calculate superficially, but actually go into the matter and render the whole structure.

but also it would just save so much energy.

And then, you know, we can take it from there.

We can say, why do we cut the silicon that grows in hexes into squares to make microchips and solar panels?

Why do we not keep it as it is?

Why do we cut all the trees into blocks to make boxes out of them?

Only harming the matter, harming the forest, harming the world, harming the whole, harming ourselves in the process.

All of that is unnecessary.

And it's a, well, it's a something that we've been doing because it's always been so, but there is no reason to continue.


SPEAKER_01:
Very interesting and great point.

Bucky did learn a lot and just apocryphally, um, apocryphally or anecdotally would ask engineers, how much does your building weigh?

Or how much did you pay per pound for this?

Or how much space is being enclosed per pound?

And it's not something that comes to mind on land.

Cool.

Where would you like to go next?

I have a few more things written down or what is just coming to mind?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, since you brought the question up, what is a gene?

I mean, I've been into molecular biology in school.

It's been one of my main interests back then.

And I do know how to make a tetrahelix, for instance, now that I know how to do synergetics.

But what would you say, what is a gene, now that you wondered?


SPEAKER_01:
Well.

I could have a quote pulled up where the Johansson, William Johansson, in the early 1900s was inventing the word, and Kirby wrote in the chat, language play is encouraged, and it is.

Mm-hmm.

The first thing that comes to mind is actually that the genetic cause, Aristotle's usage of the word genetic, has to do with Genesis and becoming.

And it was used as the word genetic referred to of the Genesis before it referred to anything about cells.

And in the end of the 1800s, in the beginning of the 1900s,

people were making advances in what was called cytochemistry, like molecular analysis of cells and also with microscopy.

And so they were able to see different sections of the cells for the first time and do breeding experiments and starting to analyze some of the molecular basis.

And again, I could find the exact quote, but Johansen writes something like, I'm drawing the word genotype and gene from gen in German, and I'm just noting that the word is free from any hypothesis.

It's like talk about statements that didn't age well or that, you know, the ship was set sail and then the creator's intention didn't really follow through.

And especially after the molecular advances in the 1900s, the gene became increasingly identified, not with the conceptually particulate unit of heredity,

or evolutionary change, but rather specific strings or sequences of DNA because it seemed like, well, these are those relatively immutable strings of heredity, right?

Aren't they what's being transmitted?


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

And then...

there was a uh sort of broadly held professional conclusion that indeed the equivalence was between genes as linear strings and that was sort of codified most simply in the one gene one protein one phenotype hypothesis and that was just the idea that like

I don't know, that the cell is like a bowling alley.

It just does one thing and it goes in a straight line.

Although interestingly, people often say that the central dogma means DNA, RNA to protein.

But in fact, the central dogma was no reverse translation.

which means protein information does not return to the nucleic acid world.

But even then, it was known and suspected that RNA could go back to DNA.

And so there's many ways to go.

And it's an interesting area.

And to also connect it to synergetics.

Thinking about how different aspects of the cell, whether they're metabolic or the cytoskeleton, are actually best understood as being a balance of tension and compression and giving rise to this emergent resilience.

through dynamic interplays of, for example, metabolic reactions that are both building something up and taking it away.

And in biochemistry, that's called a futile cycle sometimes.

And it's like, well, doesn't it increase the adaptivity of the process because it's paying sort of an idling fee, but then it's ready to ramp up?

It's like...

Yeah, it does that.

Oh, okay, so then it's not futile.

Well, it is futile because it's building it up and breaking it back down.

Yet that's the nature of metabolism.

So it would be a great...

project or or avenue to explore how some of the the molecular and material reductionism becomes intertwined and when walking and biking around biking on my tensegrity bike you know the one with the spokes the tensegrity bike i see things that say like and the four eyes that's right under the saddle

billboard will say this is in our DNA and so it's like people receive the geometric constraints that you have mentioned earlier and people inherit and imbue themselves with these molecular genetic constraints like

it's in our DNA and that's destiny and all these very interesting ways.

And they're just one way we can be educated and learners of all ages can become part of this regeneration of their mind.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah and it isn't it isn't it is interesting i mean the the the name gene speaking of i guess one base pair that is reminiscent of this whole civilized craze this madness of let's find the building block

Let's find the smallest constituent.

And if we only know that, then we can understand the whole.

When really, I mean, what is a gene without the cell or the organism it's living in, right?

And even what is a single base pair if it's not a member of a whole string of DNA or RNA?

So it's clear, as with all living things, that this is a case of synergy.

It's clearly following synergetic principles.

And with that in mind, you know,

When I was in school, my teacher was adamant in telling us about this whole discourse between the Darwinians and the Lamarckians, I guess.

and how you know before Darwin and Mendel and the invention of the dream Lamarck was saying you know well it's the hereditary passing on of you know

the long neck of the giraffe because the parents have been stretching their neck and so forth and so like back in my school days it was really the time when finally slowly epigenetics were arriving in the in the picture and they've come big you know since then

but it's again it's cutting it all in boxes and saying well here is one label and here's the other without looking at it holistically saying well you know it's all one system one organism and we can only understand the whole if we keep the whole in mind and then it's really something where the

the basis of the basis is something that is complemented by the next layer of complexity where how we read the text matters you know and so yeah


SPEAKER_01:
if i could give a few bio notes um because it's rare on a synergetic stream to get to um what was the word what was the word for the cross brace in german again the striper but um yes okay so to strive on biology for for one second on the lamarck question um a professor who has a remark on lamarck

Yes, here is Lamarck.

Professor Jessica Riskin, I took a philosophy of biology course with her in graduate school.

And interestingly, Lamarck in his day was seen as too much on the mechanistic angle.

Because people believed in Ilan Vital in this force of life.

And the mark was speculating that there might be like a fluid that conveyed some type of information intergenerationally.

That was too reductionistic.

It was too scientific.

So catch 22.

Darned if you do, darned if you don't.

And then here was the quote from Johansson in the early 1900s.

He's talking about Darwin's usage of the word pangene.

And he's saying he's referring to a few other German terms and says the word gene is completely free of any hypothesis.

It expresses only the established fact that in any case, many traits of the organism, not all traits, many traits of the organism are determined by specific, separable and independent conditions, foundations or plans.

In short, precisely what we want to call genes, the bowel plan.

is separable in its emergent function but that doesn't imply that at the micro scale there is a separability and then to connect back to synergetics um both of hakans synergetics which has to do with multi-scale


SPEAKER_00:
dynamical systems and fuller i got out of that when i read the first page and it was all into master and slave and i was like okay i i flipped through and was okay there's no triangles here on the first glance it's not he made me he may have chosen the same name yes to me it's a completely different kind of box


SPEAKER_01:
In Hakann's synergetics, there's like slower and deeper versus faster and shorter dynamical processes.

And the process by which the ripple and the wave are coordinated is indeed called the enslaving principle.

And it...

reflects how intertwined and how inseparable the doing of the science and the social context is and the way that we actually communicate research and application and um again it wasn't in my regular biology education it was the outside of the box time and outside of the major time

when all of these absolutely essential perspectives from so many different historians and cultures came to be so that just really like serves as a permanent reminder to me about how even when talking about something that's ostensibly physical even before getting into anything in the metaphysic domain still

there are more mysteries than we know about and more perspectives than we've heard.

And we have to thread the needle, thread the Marlin spike between simply hearing every perspective and actually developing one of our own so that we can serve.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Yeah, I agree.

And I think, you know, Bucky spoke of several kinds of integrity, right?

Um,

And I would say, if I were to put them together in my own words, I would say, well, first of all, there's the integrity of the whole, that is universe, which is to say everybody in the universe is both inside and outside.

then there is the integrity of pattern pattern integrity the integrity of tension transacuity and the integrity of the individual which was so dear to bucky because he understood that the only place that we can make this very very very

deep you know needed change this shift of paradigms the only place that can happen is within the hearts and minds of everyone it's not going to be any constructs of corporations or institutions or universities or any of these places that is going to have this change happen they are way too invested in the old ways and they're

They are very much shaped in the image of the box, when everyone as an individual really is still a spherical expression of the universe.

And we do have, I'm certain of it, a level of sensing where our own experience

as we're growing, I believe, is our main authority, right?

So a child, if we call the small people that, a child would be, of course, giving much weight to the authority of their parents, believing in what they tell them, and perhaps their siblings, and perhaps some other grownups, but most importantly, whatever their own senses are telling them.

And I believe that many people are actually traumatized when they are in mathematics and they are kind of, you know, shown the geometry of the Greek and they say, here is the point, you've just drawn it.

You can point to it, but it's not there.

Because that is the moment where the individual's sensorial integrity is being overridden by the authority of the book.

And the authority of the book comes from a culture, a tradition that has for the last at least 2,000 years or more been happily ignoring the bodies every step of the way, saying there is the spirit and the God and the white males closest to that in any case, but the rational mind and all these things.

They've been even, like, that's Bucky's beef with the geometers is they were unscientific because they only mentioned three out of four tools they were using, not including their own body.

But they said, you know, compass or divider, straight edge or ruler, and a scribe.

That's three.

And they said all their geometry was done with that.

But if you only had those three tools, you might notice it's impossible to draw geometry with those unless you have somebody to draw it on.

You need somebody to trace out those relationships upon, be it the earth, geos, or a piece of wood or a stone or whatever.

And there's a whole...

deep deep deep deep deep dive we could take into the origin of the alphabet and the works of david abram who looked into this who's been really really deeply influential on my sense of self um

and here's where i learned what time is from which i also integrated with synergetics but um all of that is pointing to the fact that this whole tradition is ignorant of the embodiment and it's

placing a lot of of worth and value on something that is only imaginary which is the this level of the spirit or the mind that is without a body um you know and the even the the objectivity of science is still a remnant of that because it's basically the the translation of the omniscient god into omniscient science

when everything in the universe is intersubjective and there is no need to declare any objectivity

um so i think that this moment in in the school where the pupil is taught to just to not trust their senses because the point they have just drawn is supposedly not really there because the point is without dimension um i think that is

for many people the the moment when when they are really getting into the cognitive dissonance they have already been embedded in it since their birth but that is the moment when it's really written into their perception and yeah i think that this

there is no good reason to hold on to that as it's been proven to be mistaken and again we could go even deeper into many reasons why it clearly is wrong but just for a moment if we imagine

all the creative potential and the magnificent mind that we have as human animals that has been channeled into the abstraction.

Abstraction originally meaning a channel that you take off a river.

That's the abstraction.

So the river is reality.

We're in the channel we call 3D reality.

And all of this destruction that we've wrecked upon the earth, all the desertification of one civilization after the other, all the harm, the trauma, the colonization, the civilization, all of that stuff has been done within that channel.

but there is that river still and we can just get out of the channel and get back into the river flow along with everything no need for force no need for pushing anything we can draw everything the way we need it we can look at the world and see what it is that we need and

how we can draw connections in the existing landscape that facilitates our needs while keeping the whole intact.

And I think if we do that, the capacity for healing, for reintegrating, for

for you know just making whole again the capacity that we have between us is really immense it's it's far far far greater than the capacity of destruction that we've run to its ultimate extremities by now

and that is what keeps me so hopeful because I know that we've been doing a lot of harm I could throw a stone and find anything anywhere and say look how bad this is and how bad that is and oh did you know that there's no end to that however it's all the outcome of a false perception and if we

abandon that because we can just you know we when we're not depending on it anymore it's not the only story there is if we let go of that and embrace what is real embrace the lee as the chinese call it the

the ways and patterns that universe comes at us and comes through us and, you know, we're come out of it, then we have a potential to, to regenerate and, um, recover a lot of the ground that has been discovered and broken.

And I think it's going to be,

It's going to be a beautiful world when we are living in that place.

And it's going to be something that will draw slowly first, but more and more quickly everyone in.

Because if we're looking at the world right now, there is the fossil.

the fossil-minded people that hold onto their old ways stubbornly because they are rigid in their thinking and they don't know any way out of that.

The only thing they ever knew was the boxes.

But there's also a growing number of people of hearts and minds that have the intuition that indeed

There should be another way.

We do have what they say structural problems or systemic problems and structural change is necessary or whatever.

They don't know what structure and systems are, but that is something we can

know we know we can share that it's something that is common sense for universe and it's just been you know what did they do with the comments in in britain they uh well they put walls around it i guess so we are we can break those walls down and share this understanding with everyone because

it will only grow.

It will only get more and more complimentary over time.

There is no need for competition in it.

There is no need for one upmanship or I am better than you or don't do that.

That's mine or any of that stuff.

There is no need for war.

If we realize that our whole self is not just within us, but also without us, you know, and yeah,

yeah i i think we're we're just in that transitional phase right now and i i would say for the last maybe 50 years or so or maybe since bucky has gone

I believe we've been in that phase where some of us knew there is another way.

And maybe they decided every now and then that they could take that one.

But why shouldn't we also keep the old way?

Because it's there.

And I think we're getting into, actually, I keep calling this time the age of recovery.

Because I think

we we should be clear i am clear on this at least for myself and those people who are with me on the follow feedback systems for instance we've been getting more and more clear on this that indeed it is

It is so.

If we do want to make science, if we do want to be precise and concise, and if we do want to keep it real, then we need to agree that there is no such thing as 3D reality and linear time.

and what is there is very easy to grasp if we model it and we can model it it's also much easier to to speak about if we let go of the old terms that that may not really help in understanding and then

Yeah, I think this shift can happen much faster than anyone would see coming right now because we have all these tools that can spread all kinds of misinformation and nonsense in no time at all.

But why shouldn't it change to spreading some sense for a change, you know?


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks.

I'll add a few notes.

I'm going to return to Bucky at the chalkboard and the teacher presses the chalk against the board and says, this is the zero dimensional point.

The line is one dimension because we can represent the position along the line with one number, but the dot is both there and it's nowhere.

and if that doesn't make sense you're in nonsense but how can you be outside of that point and bucky later recasting saw the point as a finite amount of very sharp

irregular but shapes of chalk and it's actually that moment we can be like the child in that moment and and are we going to go with the flow that well you just made a finite little imprint on a blackboard

or a whiteboard or that just is a shape it's a finite amount great that's cool it's pointillism it's beautiful but the idea that now i have to abstract like you very nicely point out go away from what is flowing with my sense into this like world and then the adult structures will reward you for abstracting this way

And then the idea of common sense and the commons in the sense of shared resources, our epistemic commons, not just our grazing or our growing areas, but also our knowledge commons.

and the idea that common sense isn't just what is at any given moment shared amongst people because whole masses of individuals may have um total agreement on something and it might be not a regenerative belief but rather common sense being the sense that arises and sustains the commons

And then to give one note as somebody in the science as a career, because I believe that everybody is in research and science as a mode of investigation, but now we have this also lifestyle and career.

And I think about the evolution of what has come to be understood as evidence.

so what has come to distinguish sense from nonsense or science supported from not and initially or at least initially in the last several hundred years there was a notion of positivism we're going to go out there and we're going to positively determine things about the world this tree is three meters tall that's a we didn't know now we know zero to one positivism


SPEAKER_00:
positivism three meters now a day ago it was a little less tomorrow it's going to be a little more but now three meters that made way in a culture of


SPEAKER_01:
criticism and beginning to deal with some of the seeds of the true polycentrism towards falsification disproving hypothesis testing do you accept or reject the p value did this clinical trial result in this statistical test with this p value below this arbitrary threshold and that was based upon not the zero to one of positivism but the

more than two, which for us is unity, unity is minimum two, bringing it back to one.

so we are going instead of the zero to one building up knowledge from the tabula rasa in the inscription of knowledge from the space of hypotheses being reduced to one however i would argue that through bayesian statistics as well as some imbuement of several social threads there is more of a polycentrality

For example, in cognitive sciences now, we can talk about, through active inference, how behavior is optimal for a given entity, given their priors and their attention.

For example, it's like a ball rolling down a hill.

You can argue that you don't want it to go a certain way, but given the ball's starting position in the landscape,

is what it is and that um as we move into the plural verse not the meta verse not something that is abstracting us even again beyond and on top of but rather embodying this plurality of perspectives and starting positions that we all are in already i think there's some really amazing opportunities there i agree


SPEAKER_00:
And I'm happy you brought up polycentrism, because I've been playing a lot with poly terms.

Because one thing is, I don't see any polyhedra in the universe.

I do see polyops, which is to say many eyes.

Ops being, I guess, it's a Greek.

I think it's Greek for I. So tetraps, octops, icosops, polyops.

So universe is polyoptical.

It's also polyform.

I kept pointing out that the cube and the square are uniform because they come with the implicit idea that you could fill all space, all of that imaginary space without time.

You could fill it all with cubes.

You could have a surface and completely cover it in squares.

That's nonsense, because space time is spherical.

You can't do it.

You can't cover the Earth in squares.

And still, we're fighting over square miles of land.

And we're creating artificial landscapes of monocrops, trying to create the idea of uniformity out there.

And when we do the same with people,

the outcome is disastrous as well um however the the the actual structure of space-time is not uniform it's actually poly form because if I show you even this the the two frequency of the four eyes right so here is the four eyes and it's the two frequency say meaning

along the edge of this there's one two three hearts which is centers of spheres so there would be three spheres here and between the two between the three is two intervals you know interval is the valley between two spheres so this is two frequency

And within this, we find it's actually complementary, complemented out of two kinds of shapes.

Because this big thing is made up of four small four eyes, and between them is a gap, and that's an eight eyes.

And this is a kind of

plurality or complementarity that we find throughout all of these structures here's this two frequency eight eyes and we find it's six small eight eyes with eight four eyes between them here is a bit of a more complex version of the this is a two frequency what i call mother of all spheres bucky called it the vector equilibrium so

there is a whole lot of spheres in this but we also find that it's always adjacent complementation of eight eyes and four eyes which comes already to us at us if we look just at the first triangle unfolding because the first triangle

is one triangle but the moment you unfold it it actually turns um polyform as i say so polyformity in that sense is which which one take do i take to show you what i just said because it's hard to to understand what i'm saying if i don't show it as well

but here let me take that one out again if i untangle one of these connections this is what i call a pair of eyes for for obvious reasons if you follow my uh my reasoning and if i fold it it's one eye right so here is a unit of a plane

we could use it for surfaces of kinds or whatever but the moment we unfold this the moment we create more than one of these it goes two ways and that is what i call polyform it's that ever-present complementation it's the inside and the outside the yin and the yang that makes the dao and you know that is only

continued throughout the higher complex levels of these structures.

But that is telling us that if we do actually use this framework, we have a framework that is from the beginning

creating diversity it's actually integrating diversity it's it's the very thing that diversity comes from and or the very place it's not really a thing so we with that in mind we can

allow for the diversity of universe around us and within us to really shine and come into its full without having to be afraid of it and trying to keep it small and boxed in cutting off corners here and there and I mean a very clear example of that is this this is the double four eyes some people might call it the Merkaba it's

You see there's a light colored eight eyes in the center and around it is eight four eyes.

So we could say it's got eight electrons in the outer shell.

So this is kind of happy to be as it is.

It's a full dozen quanta volume.

However, this is not a cube.

While it has all the

eight corners of the cube present, you see there is no edge to that cube.

There is no connection here.

And if we are looking at everything through the frame of the cube, then this is still there.

We just can't see it.

All we see is something that isn't there.

And that does not allow us to

qualify anything we can maybe quantify some things we can say well this is so and so many cubic volumes of something but looking at the same thing through the polyoptic lens through the synergetic the spherical lens we actually find that we can indeed qualify we can say look this structure here has indeed eight four eyes

four of them being up or out the other four in you know there's two directions even in that and there is an eight eyes that's a wholly different kind of structure which still is the same structure in a way but it's also qualitatively different and we can speak to that we can recognize it we can use it when we do not

stick to the frame that ignores it and lastly i'd like to if i may


SPEAKER_01:
Can I make one comment on that?

Okay, I'll make a comment on that.

And then, please, this last example will be great.

So Kirby had written in the chat, the idea of multiple geometries and multiple maths is to our advantage, because it's the type of plurality academia already celebrates, old meaning of liberalism.

So...

Then I thought about the two eyes and the polyops and about how we take an individual perspective with two eyes and even an insect with its compound eyes also takes one perspective.

And then how in a conversation we can have multiple perspectives that cohere into one, unity, plural, and at minimum two.

And then it reminds me of one of the last vestiges of the XYZ, the cubists fighting back, but we can pack our boxes together.

really well look at the cargo ship we can pack just cubes or just rectangles and it's like unless we're living on a spherical planet unless you have to make it tall and even if you do co-tesalating

And making unity a plurality in how we fill space is actually an even deeper lesson than, well, if you just disinfect the surface, then it'll be clean.

Well, how about a living surface that's in balance?

It's two different approaches and there's a valley between them or a hill between them and an activation energy that's needed because if you need to keep the counter clean, then you really need to keep it clean.

And if you need to have a healthy microbial biofilm, you really need that healthy microbial biofilm.

It can't be kind of half hearted in either way.

And that is indeed, I think where we may be at this time.


SPEAKER_00:
That's an integrity.

Yes.

That's where pattern integrity plays a role.

Because, you know, like with this, I was just preparing this on the side.

This is a four eyes, again, of straws and beets.

And with this, I'll show you in a second why I put it together.

But I can show you that the nesting I spoke of earlier, the turbining, because I can turn a corner of this this way around.

or that way around.

It doesn't change anything else about this thing except for that nesting.

But if I have it all the same way around, I find pattern integrity.

So if you look at these straws here, this goes under this, but over this.

This goes under here and over here.

This goes under here and over here.

it's a weave continuously woven around.

And as long as I keep all the corners in the same turn, this weave is continuous over the whole thing, giving it pattern integrity.

And in biology, we find that with the handedness of the molecules, how sugar in life is only one direction turned, while out of the lab, you get it both ways.

So at the beginning, life made a choice.

I'm going to go this way.

And then it stuck with it.

It's fine.

In the beginning, it could have chosen the other way.

It would have been just as fine.

But it stays with that pattern.

The same way I believe that the reason why spacetime, as we know it, is going this way as it goes is because in the beginning, the universe began whenever that was.

spinning one way it could have gone both ways it shows one and that's the direction that space-time is unfolding in if it were unfolding the other way we wouldn't notice the difference it would still be unfolding the same way just turning the other way but i i i would still um respectfully disagree with kirby on that because with with that notion of the two systems at play because

While I agree that it might, in certain instances, it may be helpful to keep both at play, because we can understand the one that we've been using truly only if we know the other.

And we can continue using it for special occasions, like we still have a whole lot of boxes in the world.

What do we do with them?

I believe we need to be sort of of one mind on which one we need or which one we choose to be the one that we're using.

as the beginning as the as the the ground of all as the heart of the matter you know and i think it's clear that when we use the box thing as the heart everything disintegrates we've done that for a while while if we were to use uh the sphere at the heart then we would get to a different place we would be integrating all the time and

We could accommodate the boxes if need be, but I think we still need to make that shift.

We need to be clear with everyone that we speak to.

And with that, here is that last model.

So I showed you earlier somewhere the mother of all spheres, which is if we looked at the actual spheres, it looks a lot like this one, where you have a dozen spheres around one.

Like that.

And you spoke of Bucky and zero and all that kind of stuff.

So Bucky found out that zero has a geometry and the geometry of zero is what he called the vector equilibrium because that's the nucleated system.

That's an omni-embracing sphere growing around a nucleus.

And in my languaging, I would call that

Back to equilibrium.

While I love the name, it's a very good name, I just call it the mother of all spheres because it's what you get when you put spheres around a sphere.

Seems reasonable.

And I can just put this in here for a second while keeping talking.

So if we have a sphere being a membrane with a center of gravity,

then here is that just coming into being i'm just connecting the center of gravity with the membrane currently putting the dozen spheres out here all around the one sphere in the center and

Almost.


SPEAKER_01:
Just one note there, reading a Kirby note.

Vector equilibrium equals 12 balls around a nuclear one, four hexagon necklaces crisscrossing in 12 places.

Expanding the pattern outwards with more balls, 1, 12, 42, 92, gives IVM ocean indefinitely huge.

So that's how we have our origin points as well as space fillings.


SPEAKER_00:
Indeed.

And it's not space filling, it's space-time filling.

This is not space.

There is no space.

There only is space-time.

And that is completely structured.

And looking into the so-called vacuum of space and seeing it's a dark place is really ignoring that it's full of light.

It's just we see the light only if we look into the origin of the light along the rays.

But here is a sphere.

this is a mother of all spheres and you see how it likes to dance, right?

So I can even have a dance a little to fold into this and then it pretends.


SPEAKER_01:
I saw there the floppiness of the square.

I saw the dancing and the semi constrained square being able to actually use its mobility in a positive way.


SPEAKER_00:
It is because, you know,

Actually, there are squares present within space-time everywhere, but they are not solid or static.

They are the actual dynamic interplay of the triangles.

The right angle is the angle of precession, which is the most dynamic thing we could have.

It's just been tended to be perceived as a very unmoving thing, which is a bit problematic.

But yes, it is the squares, the so-called

that enable the dancing, the movement here.

And here, actually, I should have put that in a little later, but I need to pee so badly.

I'm a bit the other way around right now.

But we can go this way also.

So this is a sphere.

We have the membrane.

We have the center of gravity in there.

But if I take that out, because now this sphere has grown, and the womb opens, and the seed can

know take a flight and disentangle and go out like a lion uh dandelion seed taking root somewhere that membrane we just had this one can really dance now and bucky called this the jitterbug which was a dance at the time

I call it the dance of the Dao because it embraces all of the structures of space-time.

As we can see here, well, here it's the, whoops, whoops, whoops, sorry.

It's the mother of all seals.

And then it goes into the eight eyes.

And then a truncated four eyes.

into a two frequency triangle or left angle four eyes unfolded can be one four eyes this way or inside out the other way and it can even go down to one eye here's one eye that polyform where it all starts all right so all of those that we looked at so far are part of that already but


SPEAKER_01:
there's one more hidden in there and i think i'm just can can you can you bear with me if i oh yes yes go for it and then when you come back we'll finish it out great perfect thanks everybody for your great comments in the chat there's just so much wisdom and so many awesome additions and perspectives there and

As I had written there, I really like what Strippy said about the orthogonal angle being the most dynamic through precession.

That's like spinning a bike wheel and why is it hard to turn it from side to side?

So there is something that's happening at the orthogonal relationship between forces.

And then Bucky also takes that idea of precession in the case of, for example, a honeybee who's looking to forage on pollen and nectar.

And by doing so is part of the regeneration of the flowers and precession also applies outside even there.

And then that, uh,

It just ties so many great things together.

I guess while Strupey's away, I can talk about him, but really appreciate that we could make this happen today, and it's the first Synergetic stream where there's been a discussion, even though I guess all have been discussions with Bucky or others in their own way, with Carl Friston or with William Blake, and...

If you're watching and you want to get involved or make suggestions or be a guest, all of these would be awesome.

And I just hope people get involved with Synergetics or whatever linguistics it is.

It doesn't have to be English.

It doesn't have to be a human language.

art as an expression media and computer languages and programming data structures are actual physical structures as their ultimate own embodiment the supply chain and how people in society care for each other welcome back


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, sorry for that, but if the universe is calling, one can only keep the drawing in for a while.

Now I'm better.

Yeah, you were speaking of supply chains in the meantime.


SPEAKER_01:
I just thought of the supply chain as like...

its own embodiment language is amazing, computer and human languages.

And without wondering whether it is abstract or not, it has elements of both.

It is embodied and vocalized, but it's also abstraction.

And then what are the real world systems, the rubber on the road or the turbine and the knot where it's like,

transcending or sub sending in sending any kind of abstraction because it is what it is and it's life and death and it's without description.

It's its own base reality.

It's like a one frequency non abstract system.

And so it's one reason I think synergetics is so powerful because it does allow us to generalize and abstract.

And to find patterns across scales and systems, but also we can apply it to the livingry that is going to support people at their most core essence.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, because if you speak of synergetics abstracting, you know, I think it doesn't.

doesn't really abstract it it it does read out of the experience the patterns and the principles that you know generalized principles are always true and omni integral omni inter accommodative and all these things um but while they the the knot itself is a metaphysical pattern that is

always present whether we embody it or not um it is also something that needs the embodiment to become present in a way so i think you know

in my mind all of these things have come into being one whole thing and it's very hard to uh to really abstract anything within that recognition of the behavior of the whole because it's more of an ex um putting into words

something that is already put into universe it's already there and then we can point it out and we can speak of it but it's not really taking away from it and abstraction is to take away from we're not taking away from the whole we are adding all the time and yeah i i think it is incredibly powerful in that regard because

To begin with the whole and then go from there is a very, very, very different part or place than to begin with taking apart, to look at whatever the building block may be.

And there is no such thing as building blocks in the universe, none.

It's futile to look for them.


SPEAKER_01:
When we start with the whole, with the I, and when we start with specifically the I,


SPEAKER_00:
and minimum two and a few other themes that weave together we unfold in such a different way we do we are unfolding in the way of the whole and that is you know when we do that we're it's really it's it's hard to grasp

in a way, the difference between this and that.

Because most people have only ever experienced the world through the partialized and compartmentalized and the atomic, where the idea is if we just break it into the smallest bits, then we know it.

Who was it who said the only real atom is the universe?

that's a very true statement you can't take universe apart um and there's no need to um however now that i've taken a little bit of the my uh needing to be somewhere else out of the uh yes feel free to conclude this model and then give any closing thoughts

I'd love to.

So I was showing the membrane dancing and all that.

And I said that the seed would go off to take root somewhere and grow into its own.

Well, there is a way how the whole is growing.

And that's what I call the story of the spheres.

There's a version of it that I call the story of the six spheres, which I think is a very good small sized introduction into the whole thing.

And those of you who wanted to look into that, you can find it on my website or on my YouTube channel.

The website is followfeedback.systems.

But when the seed takes root and grows, when one cell divides in two,

And then from there, we get very quickly to the body that is the first of all, the first sphere out of spheres, the four eyes here.

And even that membrane itself, if I had begun with this the other way around, I could have begun with it being one eye.

which then unfolds into the four eyes right so here is the first time we have inside and outside and now here is a four eyes that has grown out of that seed somewhere but if we take that and dismember it for a moment right because it's only just these rings of beads and these buttons here

My cat is getting demanding.

Sorry for that.

So he knows it's time.

But anyways, I'm just doing this quick, taking these apart.

Here is six fingers.

I call a vector a finger because it's pointing from one heart to another.

And if I take these six and put them into this membrane of the mother, we get something which was hidden in the dance in between, out of phase with the others, something where we only have a membrane and no internal structure at all.

So I'm just going to put in these connections between these corners through what was oftentimes perceived as squares.

Oh, no.

Hi.

Get off the computer.

Get off.

Get off.

Are you still there?

I hope so.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, yes.


SPEAKER_00:
He's interfering.

Interference pattern.


SPEAKER_01:
Wow.


SPEAKER_00:
wildly that's his tail our our calendar says right now a chinese proverb i gave a i gave a command to my cat and they passed it on to their tail ah always sitting on the keyboard all right okay so i'm i've come to the last finger missing

when we just arrived at Pacman, basically.

And when we plug that last one in, we've just added six fingers to the system, which was, as you recall, one four-eyes worth.

And what we got now is the dozen and eight eyes.

So a dozen and eight, if you recall, your clock is 20.

So this is what the Greek would call an icosahedron, 20 eyes.

But it really is a dozen and eight also.

And I think there is much to be said about a dozen instead of decimal system with regards of all things synergetic.

But this is the third out of the so-called platonic solids that has triangles, right?

There's four eyes, the eight eyes, and a dozen eight eyes.

And they all turn out to be

members states of the same transformation of the same patterning of the same matterning maybe it's the dance that the mother can be showing us if we just open our eyes to it and this is a beautiful useful structure but it's also we've got you know a whole spectrum of structures they are all

transformable from one to the other and each one comes with their own qualities and benefits and uses and not all of them need to be the one solution for all which is the the box thing you know where whatever the problem we only begin with that always so yeah that's just like a short and small and neat

little look into what what this can can show us if we if we look and if we listen and if we dare to be naive as bucky invited us to well thank you for this awesome synergetics number 16.


SPEAKER_01:
That's a dozen and four.

It is.

It absolutely is.

It's four, four, it's a dozen and four.

And I hope we can continue the discussion and work.

And yes, just sending omnidirectional appreciation.

Until the next time, Strippy.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, thank you so much.

It was really a beautiful conversation.

And I always enjoy talking with you.

And I hope whoever was here, I did not see the chat.

I'm sorry.

I was kind of on the jitsy side of things.

But I hope it was fun for everyone.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

See you later.

Bye.


SPEAKER_00:
Ciao.


SPEAKER_01:
Peace.