ActInf Livestream #040.2 ~ "A free energy principle for generic quantum systems"
================================================================================
Category: Livestream
Series: Livestream_040 (Episode 2)
Duration: 1:53:59
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cgo-0UU848M

Hello everyone.
This is ActInflab livestream number 40.2 on March 24, 2022.
Welcome to the ActInflab.
We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.
This is a recorded and archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work, hear about your QRF.
All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome.
We may actually have to change this to all QRF are welcome.
And we'll follow video etiquette for livestreams.
Check out activeinference.org to learn more about the activities in the lab.
Today in 40.2, we are continuing to learn and discuss this awesome paper, A Free Energy Principle for Generic Quantum Systems, by Fields, Friston, Glazebrook, and Levin.
And we're really appreciative to have several of the authors joining us today.
And in this .2, we're just going to have introductions and then jump right in to several of the notes that we left for ourselves from last time.
And see where else it goes.
Anyone can write a comment in the live chat and we'll just say hello again, pick up with some threads that were left unspooled in the .1 and see where we get in the .2 and how we continue going forward.
So I'm Daniel.
I'm a researcher in California.
And I will pass it to Dean.
Morning.
My name is Dean.
I'm in Calgary in Canada.
My emphasis, I think, is on the practice part of active inference and seeing how it gets applied in different contexts and situations.
I'll pass it to Blue.
I am Blue Knight.
I'm an independent researcher in New Mexico.
And I will be facilitating the discussion today.
But let me pass it off to Stephen.
He's still here.
Stephen, are you here?
Oh, you're muted, Stephen.
We still don't hear you.
Okay.
Thanks, Stephen.
We'll continue on to Dave.
Dave, I don't see.
Also left.
Okay.
Okay.
Let's continue.
Let's pass it on to the authors we go.
So let's pass it to Mike first, since you have audio this time.
Mike Levin.
Yes.
Hi.
Yep.
This is Mike Levin.
I do biology at Tufts trying to understand what living systems are doing at all scales and how intelligence manifests in various unconventional embodiments across.
And they compete in and cooperate across scales to give us the amazing phenomena we see in biology.
Awesome.
Thank you.
Dave, would you like to say hello?
Introduce yourself.
Hello.

























Maybe no audio also.
Okay.
How about Carl?
Would you like to say hello?
Yes, I would.
Hello.
I'm Carl.
I'm one of the co-authors on the paper.
I'm a neuroscientist from London.
I have to confess, I'm a bit of a passenger and admirer on this paper.
So I'm here to learn as much as to answer questions.
So I'll pass it on to Chris, who's...
Chris Fields.
Hi, I'm Chris Fields.
I'm also an independent researcher working sort of on the boundaries between physics and biology and information science.
And sort of convinced that those are all three the same actual discipline.
So this is a paper that expands on that theme a little bit.
Great.
Thank you.
So I think where we left off last time was talking about how the FEP is asymptotically the principle of unitarity.
And maybe Chris, would you mind leading us off here?
And if you want to point out a specific maybe formalism or place where we should start?
I think it was the very last formalism in the paper actually.
But maybe if you would talk us through that, that would be super appreciated.
Okay.
Well, let's talk first informally just about the motivation for this idea and how it might
make sense intuitively.
And again, I'll go back to Carl's paper from 2019, Free Energy Principle for a Particular Physics,
which the current paper is obviously modeled after in a certain way.
And as we discussed last time, I think, what Carl was able to show in Particular Physics was
that the idea of the very intuitive idea of a thing, of something that exists and importantly
maintains its identity as a single system over time.
And what that means is that it can be measured by some other system.
And it can be measured repeatedly and reliably over time by some other system.
So, so thingness is associated with repeated measurability.
And what Carl was able to show in Particular Physics was that if we assume that something
is a thing, then we're effectively assuming that it has a stable non-equilibrium steady state
density.
And therefore, we're assuming that it has a Markov blanket.
And therefore, we can treat it as implementing active inference, as constantly predicting its
own future existence and behaving so as to make that prediction come true, to the extent
that it can.
So, such behavior may be prevented or overcome by its environment.
So, the environment of something may cause it to cease to exist.
So, the thing could be a marble sitting on a table, and its environment could include a sledgehammer
that's about to come down on top of it and destroy its thingness.
So, as long as the environment doesn't do that, the object can continue to execute active inference
and maintain its Markov blanket by so doing.
And of course, its Markov blanket is what defines it as a separate entity, as a thing that's distinct
from its environment.
So, let's translate all of that into quantum theory.
In quantum theory, we have this notion of interaction as measurement already.
And we have a notion of interaction as information exchange already.
So, it's very natural to take this whole picture and make the notion of measurement over time precise
in this, using this quantum theoretic formalism.
quantum theory also gives us a very natural implementation of a Markov blanket, which in physics is called a holographic screen.
And holographic screens were introduced back in the 70s to talk about black holes.
But a holographic screen is just a reformulation of the concept of a Markov blanket.
It's a boundary that encodes information.
And specifically, it's a boundary between two systems that encodes all of the information that one system can have about the other.
So, it does just what a Markov blanket does.
It provides an information encoding boundary that gives the systems on the two sides of it identities for each other by distinguishing them.
And this notion of identity in quantum theory corresponds to separability.
Separability just means lack of entanglement.
So, if the joint, if you have two things or a thing in its environment, then if they're not entangled, you can talk about their states independently.
If they are entangled, then you can't talk about their states independently.
And so, the idea of thingness goes away.
Since thingness implies having some sort of conditionally independent state, right?
A nest density that can actually be written down.
So, all of this fits together rather nicely.
And so, if we go back to particular physics, the idea of active inference emerges from that paper as a fundamental underlying principle of physics.
That tells us what we mean by thing or system that's identifiable over time.
So, this becomes a very deep principle.
Deeper than Newton's laws, because Newton's laws actually talk about objects that are identifiable over time.
And the free energy principle and the idea of active inference tells us what we mean when we talk about something being identifiable over time.
So, if this is a fundamental principle of physics, then one would expect that it would have some relationship to the principle of unitarity, which is the most fundamental principle of quantum theory.
quantum theory.
And it's typically axiom one, which one writes down the axioms of quantum theory.
It was axiom one in von Neumann's formulation back in the 30s.
Or 40s, I can't remember which.
So, what's the principle of unitarity?
The principle of unitarity is just the principle that in a closed system, information is conserved.
So, information is neither created nor destroyed in a closed system.
So, it's a fundamental conservation law.
And it's exactly analogous to the principle of conservation of energy.
Right?
The conservation of energy says, in a closed system, energy is neither created nor destroyed.
It's conserved.
So, the principle of unitarity just says this for information as well as energy.
And we know that information and energy are very closely linked by Landauer's principle or by Boltzmann's definition of entropy or all of these other connections that make physics informational.
So, how does the principle of active inference relate to the principle of unitarity?
What does it say about the conservation of information?
Or what does the conservation of information tell us about the principle of active inference or the free energy principle?
Well, the first thing to note is that unitarity applies to closed systems.
So, thing-environment pairs.
And active inference characterizes what the thing is doing in response to its environment.
And, of course, it also characterizes what the environment is doing in response to the thing.
And another benefit of quantum theory is that it makes this symmetry between any system and its environment manifest.
It makes it very explicit.
It's already explicit in the free energy principle.
I mean, the Markov blanket has two sides.
And the system acting on its environment is the same as the environment sensing the system.
And in the same way that the environment acting on the system is the same as the system sensing its environment.
So, interaction, physical interaction is information exchange in both frameworks.
And it's perfectly symmetrical.
If the system remains identifiable over time, so does its environment.
If the system is limited to exist, it's environment ceases to exist.
Because its environment is defined with respect to it.
That's why we call it its environment.
So, all of these symmetries are built into both frameworks.
So, the free energy principle is fundamentally about prediction.
Right? VFE, Variational Free Energy, can be thought of as prediction error, or potential prediction error.
So, the free energy principle is about the system being able to predict the next state of its own Markov blanket.
And if it predicts the next state of its own Markov blanket perfectly, then VFE is minimized to zero.
And that's the asymptotic case. Perfect prediction.
There was a question last time about what's asymptotic in the claim that the free energy principle is asymptotically the principle of unitarity.
And the asymptotic state, as I think Blue pointed out last time, is perfect prediction.
So, and now let's translate all this to quantum theory.
And this is where the figure in the paper that shows the disk with the various triangles comes into play.
I think that's figure six, but I've actually forgotten.
Yeah, it's that one.
So, let's now introduce this idea of a QRF, which is just a little package of predictive capability.
QRF means quantum reference frame.
So, as we discussed last time, a reference frame is implemented computation that makes a measurement comparable across time.
So, a meter stick, for example, implements a computation of length.
And it allows us to compare measurements of length across time.
Because we assume that it's fixed.
And, of course, we can use a meter stick because each of us has embedded in our brains a representation of length.
In fact, we have a representation of a 3D coordinate system.
Without which, meter states would be useless.
So, we can use external reference frames like meter sticks because we have internal reference frames like our representation of 3D space and our intuitive understanding length.
That, we assume, stays fixed over time.
And that allows our measurements of length to be comparable across time for us.
So, now let's think about a QRF as a way of something that implements active inference or that enables a system to implement active inference by allowing it to compare its measurements over time.
Right? Prediction is meaningless if you can't compare your measurements over time.
So, and let's ask, what would it be like for a system to be able to perfectly predict the next state of its Markov blanket?
Well, the next state of its Markov blanket is a state that its environment has written by acting on it.
So, our question of perfect prediction is, what would it be like for a system to be able to perfectly predict the next actions of its environment?
And notice that the system isn't predicting the next state of its environment.
It doesn't know the state of its environment.
The state of its environment is on the other side of the Markov blanket.
What it's trying to predict is the next action of its environment on it, which is the only action of its environment that's relevant.
And the only action of the environments that's detectable.
So, its environment, like it, is characterized by QRFs.
Right? The situation is perfectly symmetrical between the system and its environment.
So, the question of predicting the system and its environment.
And the system can predict its environment's actions perfectly only if it and the environment exactly share their QRFs.
Because the QRF not only interprets sensation, it gives meaning to action.
So, it says what your action is going to be.
So, if I use my meter stick to cut a 2x4, my QRF, the meter stick, is guiding my action.
It's giving it meaning.
It's making it repeatable in the same way that it makes my perceptions repeatable.
And again, that's why we use these things.
We want to be able to act in repeatable ways as well as perceive in repeatable ways.
And if we can't act in repeatable ways, then again, the notion of prediction becomes meaningless.
So, perfect prediction corresponds to perfect QRF alignment.
So, the question becomes now, what does perfect QRF alignment correspond to?
And Jim Glazebrook and another colleague, Antonino Marciano, who's a physicist in Shanghai, showed in a previous paper that perfect QRF alignment between a system and its environment is only possible if the system and environment are entangled.
So, perfect QRF alignment corresponds actually to the collapse of the Markov blanket.
Because it corresponds to the collapse of separability.
Which means that the NESS is no longer well defined.
Because it's no longer a conditionally independent state.
And you can see that if you think of what perfect QRF alignment means.
It means that your actions correspond exactly to my predictions.
A conditional statement, it's an exact statement.
So, if I predict that you're going to do X, then you're going to do X.
Period.
Which means that your state is no longer independent of my state.
Your state actually depends on my state.
And my state, correspondingly, actually depends on your state.
If you predict that I'm going to do X, then I will do X.
That's what perfect prediction means.
When we translate it into this QRF-based concept.
So, perfect prediction and the collapse of separability are the same thing.
So, the asymptotic limit of the FEP, which is perfect prediction, corresponds to the collapse of separability.
Well, the collapse of separability is just entanglement.
And the principle of unitarity is the claim that any isolated system, left to its own devices, will evolve its state, which is the joint state of any two of its components, will evolve toward complete entanglement.
It will evolve toward a pure state in quantum theoretic jargon.
So, it's in this sense that the FEP is asymptotically the principle of unitarity.
It's that its asymptotic condition is the same as the condition that the principle of unitarity imposes on closed systems, i.e. on system environment combinations.
Where, whenever I say environment, I just mean everything that exists that's not the system of interest.
So, a system environment combination is always a closed system by definition.
So, that's my introduction and we can start on discussion.
That's great. Thank you. Steven, did you have a question?
Yes, you can hear me okay. Excellent.
I was just going to ask, that's really helpful. There's a lot in there, obviously.
I was going to ask, in terms of the pure unitarity, would that be what happens, say, at the electron or the kind of these normal quantum particles scales?
And as you go to scales above that, it becomes more and more approximate.
You have less of this isotropic, you know, this quality of knowing and entanglement.
Well, that's a very deep question and it's a very good question.
Let's think about the canonical entanglement experiment, the sort of Bell-EPR experiment.
So, I'll draw it with my hands here.
So, in the canonical experiment, you've got a source and it's located here in the middle of my face.
And it produces an entangled pair of something, photons or electrons or buckyballs or whatever you want.
And they travel apart at the speed of light or something very close to it.
And at some point, they encounter two symmetrically placed detectors.
And the detectors are operated by observers who are always called Alice and Bob.
And these detectors measure something.
And in the canonical experiment, they measure spin.
And what Alice and Bob each observe independently is a random distribution of spins.
And if we think of this as a two-dimensional experiment, then they either measure spin up or spin down in some coordinate systems.
So, Alice and Bob each pick a z-axis that defines up.
And with respect to their local z-axis, they see a random distribution of up and down.
Now, things get interesting when Alice and Bob later get together and compare their results.
And what they find is that whenever Alice observes up, Bob observes down and vice versa.
And so, they conclude that their results are classically correlated.
But then it gets more interesting.
Because what we allow Alice and Bob to do is constantly alter the direction that they detect the spin in with respect to their own local z-axis.
So, you can think of the spin detector as like a polarization filter.
So, like a pair of sunglasses.
And what Alice and Bob can do is randomly and independently change the tilt of their sunglasses while they do this experiment.
And in real implementations of this experiment, it was first implemented by Alan Aspect in his lab in Paris in the early 1970s.
And it has since been repeated probably hundreds of times by different groups all over the world, including the Chinese using a satellite to generate the entangled pairs and measuring them thousands of, a thousand or so kilometers apart.
So, if you remember the speed of lights, a foot per nanosecond.
So, you've got a lot of nanoseconds in there if you're a thousand kilometers apart to play with.
And the trick in this experiment is that Alice and Bob can change the direction of their detector within the time it takes for the entangled pair to get from the source to the detectors.
So, if it takes 10 nanoseconds to get from the source to the detectors, they have to be able to change their detectors within 10 nanoseconds.
So, that's why you want detectors that are far apart.
So, Alice and Bob redo the experiment changing, randomly changing the directions that they're measuring with respect to their local z-axis.
And then they get together again to compare their results.
And what they find is that if Alice observes up, Bob will observe down, even when they've been randomly and independently changing the directions of their detectors.
So, one way to put that is, if Alice decides to rotate her detector 45 degrees, then Bob's result will automatically be rotated 45 degrees.
And it's symmetrical, so vice versa.
So, that's not classical correlation.
That's classical correlation that's robust against manipulation.
So, I was discussing this with Carl a while back.
And I used this example.
If you and I are classically correlated, then we may have the same beliefs about something.
So, we might both believe that the Earth is round.
That's classical correlation.
That's classical correlation.
Now, suppose someone convinces me that the Earth is flat.
If that happens and you then believe that the Earth is flat, that's entanglement.
That's classical correlation that's robust against manipulation.
So, it's correlation, no kidding.
It's correlation that survives the environment doing something to you.
So, now let's go back to this question.
Is this an effect that only occurs in some microscopic domain?
And the answer is, it's an effect that was first described by a theory that was intended to only describe a microscopic domain.
Like quantum theory was developed to deal with nuclear atomic and nuclear physics.
So, there's this idea of the quantum world, which is very small.
But the math, of course, applies across the board.
And trying to think of quantum theory, trying to think of classical physics as a limit, a mathematical limit of quantum theory, always runs into problems.
And the problems are always that numbers go to infinity that shouldn't be infinity.
So, it's not really accurate to think of classical physics as some sort of mathematical limit like h-bar goes to zero of quantum theory.
Because if h-bar goes to zero, lots of relevant energies go to infinity.
And this has been known for a long time.
Nonetheless, it's constantly taught in this classical limit kind of framework that isn't really correct.
So, one point of doing Bell-EPR experiments at larger and larger distances is to demonstrate that quantum theory,
quantum theory is not really a microscopic theory.
So, if you think of an entangled state, an entangled state is one object.
It's not two electrons that happen to have some mysterious relationship.
It's one object that has one state.
Remember, what entanglement means is non-separability, non-independence across any decompositional boundary.
So, an entangled pair is one thing.
And what the Chinese were able to demonstrate was you can have one quantum object that's over a thousand kilometers long.
Now, that's not microscopic.
That's big.
A nice way to think about entanglement was introduced by Leonard Susskind quite a few years ago.
And Raphael Busa.
With their idea that an entangled pair is the same thing as an Einstein-Rosen bridge in space-time.
And an Einstein-Rosen bridge is a black hole and a white hole connected end to end.
Or you can think of it that way.
It's a topological connection in space-time that simply identifies two points in space-time that would otherwise be considered distinct.
So, this emphasizes that if you have an entangled pair, there's no distance inside it.
If you have two entangled electrons, for example, that are a thousand kilometers apart, as far as they're concerned, they're right next to each other.
And in fact, as far as they're concerned, they're located at exactly the same point in space-time.
And that's what this ER bridge notion emphasizes to us.
That there's really no separation here.
That the separation is an artifact of our observational capabilities.
It's not a characteristic of the entangled state.
So, entanglement actually calls into question what the idea of distance even means.
It makes it, it forces it to be relative to us.
And that's why there's all this discussion of emergent space-time in quantum gravity, in quantum cosmology.
Because if you think about things from a straight quantum theory point of view, space-time is in-observable.
It's just something, it's something that's relative to how an observation is made.
It's not an intrinsic property of anything.
It's not ontic, as they say.
So, let's go back to this question again.
If we think about entanglement, and we think about observation, and we think about entanglement as something that's observed by comparing observations made by different observers.
Right?
Neither Alice nor Bob in that experiment can detect entanglement.
They only realize that there's an entangled state when they talk to each other after they've done the experiment.
Then, this question of scale becomes a question about how observers interact.
And what observers can know about each other, and about each other's experimental apparatus.
So, when I described the entanglement experiment, I said, Alice and Bob each have their own local Z axis.
And when they get together and discuss their results, and they compare their results, then they make a very important assumption, which is the assumption that their Z axes are comparable.
So, if during the experiment, Bob's Z axis was varying at random with respect to Alice's Z axis, then their results, comparing their results would be meaningless.
Because they'd be measured with respect to completely different reference frames.
So, we have to make this assumption that they have the same Z axis.
Now, interestingly enough, that assumption by itself tells you that Alice and Bob have to be entangled.
Or their Z axes have to be entangled.
So, the idea of entanglement kind of expands to take in all aspects of the experimental situation.
As soon as one starts unearthing these assumptions that we make to talk about comparability between experiments.
So, let's reel the tape back in about half an hour.
And we see that quantum reference frames are what make experiments comparable for an observer.
It's similarity or comparability of quantum reference frames that make comparing experiments possible for two observers.
But, if the two observers exactly share their QRFs in a way that's robust against environmental manipulation, then they're entangled.
So, we've kind of come full circle here.
So, one can make this notion of entanglement as macroscopic as one likes.
And, again, this is, in a sense, why quantum gravity and quantum cosmology are interesting.
It's what drives things like the black hole information paradox, which you may have read about.
So, we're now getting into, in a sense, very fundamental physics.
How do we...
What's the relationship between entanglement and the concept of space-time?
What's the relationship between quantum theory and general relativity?
Which is, you know, the big question in physics from one point of view.
What is the real ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail
quantum reference frame like incompletely aligned with my own quantum reference frame like i i mean
maybe we've all had the experience of you know predicting if i kick the ball in this way i
predict it'll go over there but like it doesn't actually go over there so like i mean we predict
and we're off our prediction is is not accurate so is it like actually a temporal separation that
that like makes that happen or or what do you think happens in those circumstances where where
my qrf appears unaligned with my own qrf
now that's also that's also a beautiful deep question and it it points to something that i think
can and should be stated as a general theorem which is uh no system can perfectly predict
can perfectly predict its own state
no system can observe its own state
its own total state
so
so that situation is
um ubiquitous and unavoidable
and uh one could phrase it by saying um
a system can have a a qrf or a meta processor as one often uses that vocabulary
that represents itself so we all have a self-representation
um
that's in a sense metacognitive uh we claim to know what we believe and things like that
um but of course those beliefs are all
one very coarse-grained uh two extremely incomplete
uh three useful for making predictions but they're often wrong
and
you know this this is uh
this point this point has had huge technological consequences i mean think back to the history of
artificial intelligence
science
right in the 70s
uh there was the the huge new wave was expert systems
and you know ai people redefine themselves as knowledge engineers and we're going to go out and
interview experts and find out how experts did things and coded up in computers and soon we'd have
you know artificial expert systems that did anything interesting
and that whole
business failed utterly
right it was a complete disaster it didn't work at all
why
well the simple explanation for why is that experts can't tell you
what they're doing
expertise isn't verbalizable
and it's not just expert piano playing is it verbalizable
you know expert systems engineering isn't verbalizable expert computer programming isn't verbalizing
uh
and that's that's just an illustration of the fact that our metaprocessors don't actually have a
complete model of the rest of us much less a model of the rest of us plus the metaprocessor
uh so it all it all comes back to this
general principle that a system can't represent itself and so it can't predict its own behavior
awesome
so between this work actually i should ask carl to comment on that tirade because he's also thought
about this an extraordinary amount
well i'll certainly make the comment that um that that was marvelous you know
i'm glad this has been recorded because this should certainly be transcribed and uh i know it's probably
um implicit in the paper but it was so beautifully articulated and clear taking us through the issues
i i i really enjoyed that um so i have loads of comments but i won't i won't waste people's time
uh going through all of them and that last issue is is um really interesting about sort of the
meta processor or the metacognitive aspects of a system being able to measure itself i mean there's
a fundamental observation there of course you know um you can't measure yourself i mean you know
the whole point of the particular physics paper was to say that you know yes there can be two kinds of
information geometries if you like um and the big move is that one system can measure i.e infer
by possessing or having a movement on in some sort of information geometry infer um belief update about
something else so at no point is there any room for it just they also start to infer about its own
inference that that that that is uh you know that's a mathematical impossibility from from the random
dynamical system perspective i'm not sure sure about the uh the quantum perspective but it sounds
as though that's also true so that begs the question um how on earth do we have the illusion um that we know
ourselves um and of course you know it's a little bit of a um a colloquial question because you're 99.9
percent of things don't actually uh think that they know themselves so unless there's a particular
phenotype particle um or species that boasts philosophers i'm pretty sure that most of the things that exist
don't have any uh any pretense to to thinking that they know themselves it's a really interesting
point to get across anecdotally you know i spend a lot of time um taking people through examples
that probably go right back to things like idea motor theory um that you know the way that we um the way
that we develop a sense of agency and think that we have a sense of agency you know is a gift an illusion
that is probably unique to only a small number of us and may not even be available to people with say severe
autism and the you know the example that i literally in the past day just written down in a didactic way
was that if you just take um vanilla active inference under a markov blanket
and then you look at particular kinds of sparsity structures where the active states of the markov blanket
or the holographic screen are hidden from the internal state so these are special kinds of systems
that have a particular sparsity where now the active states of the markov blanket are now become hidden
from the internal states and you can certainly license some entanglement um and i would um i'm going to
later ask about the relationship between entanglement and synchronization so i'll say entanglement or
synchronization of the internal states such that the internal states have beliefs about the their action
but those beliefs become beliefs about action as a hidden cause so there's absolutely no notion from the
inside that you cause that you're just representing the cause so the example i have in mind is you're watching
a little fish swimming around looking for food gobbling up little bits of particles of food and you
think oh that's a very sort of um artful fish with purpose and pragmatics and knows how to navigate its
world um but from the point of view of the fish all that is happening is that the water and the particles
are moving around it in a benevolent nurturing and fortuitous way such that the water is delivering food
particles to the fish's mouth so from the fish's point of view it has absolutely no awareness that
it is the author or the agent that's causing this synchronization with the environment so you know
the deeper question is how on earth do we have the illusion that we think we know our own our own agency
and how would and when do we develop agency and you know furthermore it's not just agency about me
its agency about other things at what point do our uh in our say early neonatal neurodevelopment do we have
these models of the world that enable us to distinguish between mother and self you know and at what point
do we align our qrs if you like with not mother but with the world um that enables us to now see mother
as an independent object so that is something else that is an agent and you know the argument would
then be well perhaps if mother is nature perhaps i am an agent and then you know that i am now the author
of my agency and my actions but that is such you know that's such a high level thing i imagine it only
pertains to you know to humans that's what that's what i said i'd love to talk about um
um the homologues of entanglement from the point of view of classical thinking perhaps i've spoken
enough at this point um just a couple things uh came came to my mind uh listening to this um
one is that uh josh bongard had this uh amazing uh paper in uh i think it was around 2006 or so where he
had these robots and these they were they started out like six-legged starfish but the the cool thing
about it was that they didn't have an internal model of what they were and or what their shape is or how
to move and they basically had to flop around and make make models of uh their own structure based on
what happened to them given various outputs that they generated and eventually they would build a a model
of what happens and they would walk around and so on and two interesting things followed one is that you
could unlike traditional robotics you could rip off one of the legs and they would very soon revise the
model and keep going in different ways so they weren't tied to that particular self-model right
they would have to discover it from scratch but it was still sort of plastic throughout their whole
lifetime and they could they could get along so they had that plasticity and the other thing is that
and um chris christoph adami wrote a nice uh kind of uh interpretation piece of this he he described
they they spent lots of um lots of time being completely inactive and basically running through
quote unquote mentally running through all the different things that they could do and what
they think was going to happen uh before they actually moved and so you got chris uh called that
dreaming you know that they would basically sort of play out uh before you know in between their
actual motions where they would go around testing and they would actually sort of play this out internally
and try to refine the model such that then when they do move they would actually make movements that
uh maximally sort of distinguish the different different possible models and so on and he thought you
know he said that you can watch them dreaming about about their shape um so and and then the other
thing i just wanted to briefly mention this this this idea of uh when and how do you recognize that
you're an agent and that actually you need to act for things to happen versus just having the environment
and do things to you i suspect that one of the things that drives it very early on is this is this notion
of stress and i don't have a particular uh i don't have a theory of why stress feels stressful but but
just on a purely functional level i think that what happens in in cells you know so very early long before
you get to humans or anything like that i think that what you get is this um this the set of mechanisms
that that evolved from things like uh stress about protein folding and so on but then then basically
scaled up to be stress about metabolics and stress about morphology and stress about behavioral issues
and and so on that basically is a is a system-wide metric of um the delta between what's going on and what
you'd like to have going on right the delta between your your set point and what's happening now and
what then i think that drives a strengthening of this uh of of the agency model because what will
happen is as you as you as you slowly learn that you can do things that reduce the stress level it kind
of solidifies this idea that it's actually at least some amount of it is up to you to make life better
and and so you then then act and then of course we know that breaks down and sort of learn helplessness
assays and so on that's that's that that that really is is very traumatic for for all kinds of
creatures that will be law human can i can i speak to that because there's some great points there
please yeah um so three really important uh things being brought to the table there um so i'm bound to
forget the third one if i start the first but i just want to so i'm coming back to blue's um question
about sort of a um qrs and alignment and that and you know one obvious answer that um what could bring
to the table is that learning is the alignment to the qrs so learning at all scales you're and we're
talking here about developmental scales for example we're talking about robots that learn to repair
themselves or learn their new qrs and if you remove a limb or a child learning to um make sense of its world
then um you could look at the slow process of alignment of the qrs the things that are invariant
over the faster time scales of at which there is classic information exchange on or in um the holographic
screen as simply um a movement from a state of um disentanglement to a state of entanglement
um as you become better and better at predicting but to become better at predicting you have to align
your qrs and you have to to align that um i think the sort of the robot example is a perfect uh a nice
illustration of that in the sense that these robots were equipped with um the ability to learn about
themselves and of course the you know the analog um in developmental psychology and indeed i would imagine
developmental neuro robotics um is motor babbling it's basically you know soliciting um outcomes
sensory outcomes in order to start to disambiguate between what did i cause that or did you cause that
you know what parts are apparently under my control but of course you know that's a very anthropomorphic
interpretation there's no minus or ionis implicit but certainly the learning of the world models and
the body models um is probably the first thing that any artifact has to contend with because you see
that in children you're shaking their rattle to to um solicit and actively solicit the conjunction of
visual motion um proprioceptive feedback from the muscles causing the movement of the mobile or the
rattle and the auditory so soliciting uh conjunctions or correlations that are explainable and predictable
in multiple modalities so you may then ask why on earth what is the imperative for that kind of behavior
what drives action to solicit this um opportunity to um learn the the correlations and the coincidences
and the conjunctions um and that brings us to the second point um um the the um these robots dreaming
tell you immediately tell you immediately that at some level they have an internal model um of the
consequences of action uh and that tells you immediately that you've got um if you wanted to
write that down from the point of view of classical active inference you've got a um a belief structure
on the inside that covers both the con covers both the external world and these hidden actions and the
actions upon the world and the consequences of those actions on the external states that's a very
sophisticated generative model to have and you're getting now into the world of planning as inference
so a thermostat doesn't have that and yet these robots do have that so it tells you that there are
two natural kinds of particles or markov blankets or separable systems um at least two kinds one of
which is more like a thermostat and one of which is more like um um a sort of um i was thinking of
sort of like an ashby um homeostat or allostat but certainly more like these sort of uh robots that can
learn about about themselves and the cue and the crucial distinction i think is that the agent has
now started to represent the consequences of its actions but without realizing it's its own actions
we still haven't got to the level of the other metacognitive i am aware kind of kind of art about
and it interestingly comes back to um what i was saying before about natural kinds where one's active
states are hidden from the internal state so they have to become inferred
you have to infer them they're not they're not they are opaque to the internal states and as soon
as you say it like that then you're naturally talking about systems that um can effectively
engage in planning as inference so they have to have plans in their heads uh in order to act which
you know corresponds to uh to the streaming and from the point of view of the uh the three of the active
inference um then you ask well what are the objective functions um or what are the principles of least
action that would um apply to these kinds of plans and when you work it through then one important
component of the um the sort of the pathogenes or the actions in question is a drive to resolve uncertainty
so we come back to this notion of the child soliciting proprioceptive extra receptive um
sensations that enable it to resolve uncertainty and this is exactly the same principle behind optimal
basic design that we design experiments that are going to resolve the uncertainty to the greatest extent
possible under our current internal models or hypotheses about how the world works and that brings me to the
third great point uh about stress uh and the the really important um um place of stress and uncertainty and
angst and not knowing what to do next or not knowing what's going to work in driving behavior because if
a large chunk of the imperatives or planned action is to maximize information gain or minimize expected
surprisal or reduce uncertainty then you can see easily now why it is situations of uncertainty and stress
that will necessarily uh cause the most um epistemic uh responses in order to drive the system or the uh
in this instance the agent um to resolve that uncertainty the final point now and this is basically
paraphrasing what mike just said if the system sees itself behaving more in times of greater uncertainty
it may now learn that and and now have the idea oh i am the kind of system or i am behaving as if i am
the kind of system that responds more when under stress and then you'll become aware of that and then
you can get into the psychiatric or psychological aspects of stress you may not if you're just a protein
you may just show a sort of um a sort of selection for selectability like response um but this you know
the i think that you know the two fundamental mechanisms the imperatives that are being fulfilled
here in accord with basic conservation laws or principles of least action from the classical perspective
um account for exactly the same kind of behavior i think the interesting thing about stress uncertainty
though is that we're not talking about um the um the content of implicit belief structures but the
the the second order statistics the uncertainty uh and that's i think you know brings a whole level
of analysis to the table because once you talk about uncertainty and representations of uncertainty
um in say internal states um then from a psychological perspective you start to talk about tension and
consciousness um from the point of view of an engineer we're talking about things like calman gain and get
getting the estimates of noise levels if you like uh correct um uh and i'm not sure what what where the if
you like the well let me ask um from a quantum theoretic point of view is uncertainty baked into that can
you can you have a stressed quantum uh quantum formulation i'll put that out there well stop talking now
yeah just uh just to answer that question um if if one if one thinks about quantum theory uh
from with a bayesian view of probability right with a kind of subjectivist notion of probability
um which i mean that point of view was really pioneered by chris fuchs and and now david merman for
example has taken it up and uh written some very good things about it um then this notion of uncertainty
reduction of becomes the explanation for why you do experiments and build theories and and uh it all becomes
very well aligned i think with with uh the idea of active inference and in fact we we wrote into that
paper at the very end some remark about uh this cubist perspective about quantum theory becoming a result
not an interpretation uh when we think of of quantum theory as in a sense a way of reformulating the idea
of active inference uh so i think they're very consistent right uh uh a stressed a stressed quantum is uh
stressed quantum system is just a system that gets uh observational outcomes that it doesn't expect
so you know we we have to think of uh such systems as having generative models and thinking about
the generative model of an electron uh is a bit of a stretch right because the electron
electron is only characterized by mass charge and angular momentum so uh it it can't really have
expectations about much right electron can have no expectations about the external electric field for
example um it can detect that it can respond to it but it can't predict it and
if we think about uh something like an electron then we can focus in on this idea that having a generative model
requires having enough memory to keep a record of the most recent observation at least the most recent one
and if you want to have a good generative model then you better have enough memory to keep a record of quite a number of observations
and it's this memory resource that really simple things like electrons don't have
so uh they're they're not great predictors
uh because they don't have the memory to allow being a great predictor
and as as both carl and mike were saying um in a sense you you have to have memory to be able to feel stress
now you have to know that your predictions were wrong so you have to remember what your predictions were
so memory becomes a really key component of the theory uh once you put it into this language
uh because the language in a sense forces you to to lay out assumptions about what the what the
computational resources that are being required are that wasn't very coherent but anyway i i just wanted
to stress the role of memory here perfect thank you carl
yeah just to um reinforce and endorse that last point um and uh just tell exactly the same story
in a much more pragmatic way from the point of view a statistician so i heard chris say there basically
that if i want to go beyond being a little electron or a thermostat and i want to now um infer the quality
of how noisy are my sensors for example my thermore senses if i'm a thermostat that will require me
becoming a little statistician and what does that mean well basically i'm going to be estimating the
standard error or the um the experimental variance there's something quite important about that you
know which which um uh comes back exactly to the computational resources and memory if you do a simple
t-test as a statistician on some experimental data you necessarily have to acquire lots of data points
and store them and of course that is just the degrees of freedom associated work with your t-test
your rf test so the degrees of freedom score the number of data points that you'll be able to
remember and you need a sufficient number in order to get a precise estimate of the uncertainty so
literally the degrees of freedom in classical statistics is literally a statistic that scores your
confidence in the estimation of the standard error which is pooled over multiple observations which is an
attempt to estimate on average if i observe with this kind of um or i i asked my questions or i wrote to
my holographic screen um i or i um solicited these sensory states um you know what would on average what
would the uncertainty be associated with it so i think it's a really important important point about the
computational resources the degrees of freedom literally in the sense of the trees of freedom associated with
your f test all the degrees of freedom you have available for the computing power to actually get
up to these second order inference machines or takes on on second order inference so and i think that is
particularly important when it comes back to mike's observation about stress and uncertainty and these
higher order ways of making sense of the world but in this instance making sense of sensations that are
accrued over time not about the content but about the reliability of the or the precision of that content so
that is a really important point awesome so that kind of oh chris go ahead
if i could just pick up on this and and take it in in yet another highly related direction it's just to
point out that that all of these resources are energetically expensive so if i'm going to devote
space in in my state space to recording memories then that's only useful if i can defend those memories
against entropy if i can keep them from decaying so i've got to consume energy to write the memories i've got
to consume energy to energy to maintain the memories and then i have to consume energy to read the memories
and consume energy to uh compare what i've read with what i see with my kind of current event sensors
so as we start adding these computational resources to systems the energy budget goes way up
and uh it's it's another kind of thing to keep in mind as we think about these in terms of embodied forms whether they're robots or organisms
that uh these these entities are extracting this free energy that they have to have to run their computations and maintain their memories and all of that from the environment
so here's this is another input that in a sense is not sensory but it's still having to flow through the markov blanket it's still having to flow through the boundary between the system and its environment
and a lot of the system's actions on its environment its expenditures of of um of its own internal energy
uh are to acquire this free energy so you know we we go out and shop for groceries make breakfast or whatever
uh that's stuff that we have to do to keep all these processes running
so it ties metabolism and cognition together in a way that they aren't often tied but that they have to be to make sense of what's going on
so um
great so just on that point um something that we had
written down as a question from last time
um and in terms of
an electron having a generative model
and discussing agency we had talked about free choice and it was brought up in the paper
several times both in terms of like any physical system having free choice
free choice if if one physical system has free choice they all have free choice they generate like
their their um noise generating things like free choice generates noise in both classical and quantum
systems and so i just was wondering if you could maybe say a few words about the difference in free choice
in an electron and the difference in between between an electron ends like a human or an animal or even a cell
um what is that difference and is that also related to memory
uh is that a question for me a general question for anyone
well i'll i'll make a couple of comments
uh
one is uh remember in talking about the canonical entanglement experiment
uh part of the description is that alice and bob can uh alter the directions of their detectors
however they want to at random independently whatever you want to call it during the experiment
so that's the free choice assumption or that's called in physics the free choice assumption
and what that assumption means
it's effectively an assumption of independence it means that there's not some common cause in the past
that determines what they're going to do as they operate their detectors
and one can reformulate
quantum theory
quantum theory
in terms of what's called super determinism
and super determinism
is the idea that
there is some common cause in the past
the first
that determines
how experimenters are going to do their experiments
and in particular determines how alice and bob are going to rotate their
detectors in this epr experiment
super determinism
uh super determinism is kind of the ultimate non-local hidden variable
uh so
it
uh
it allows you to predict exactly what entangled pairs are going to do and in fact it renders
entanglement a classical effect
right it just says
these these kind of super classical correlations
are present
because there there was no independence to begin with
everything was determined from the very beginning
and if you think about
as as mentioned last time newtonian physics is formulated by laplace
the universe
it's a super determined deterministic system
uh
so anything that happens anywhere in the universe
instantly affects what's going on everywhere else in the universe
and the most the most current formulation of that is bromium quantum mechanics where the motion of any particle
depends instantaneously on the motion of every other particle in the universe
universe
and that's how newtonian gravity worked
right before einstein imposed locality by making the speed of light finite
so all of these things are interconnected assumptions about space-time assumptions about the speed of communication
assumptions about super determinism and assumptions about
free choice
the so-called free will theorem in physics is about
or theorems there are now a couple of them
due to conway and koken
and
uh
uh
what those theorems show is that
from a formal perspective
uh
in physics if you assume that some system has free choice
so if you assume that some system
is not subject to super determinism
then you have to assume that all systems have free choice
in the sense that all systems are not subject to super determinism
so you can't limit super determinism to some little piece of the universe
and say it only applies here
uh it doesn't apply anywhere else
and in particular it doesn't apply to me
i have free choice even though nothing else does
that's mathematically inconsistent
um
so that's
that's
what
what the free choice assumption means in a
in a strict physical context
thank you very cool
even did you have a question
i was just going to ask a little bit more about the um the degrees of entanglement
and um whether that's different in terms of the observers degrees and versus the like
the mechanical nature of quantum mechanics degrees
i think you've answered that to some extent but uh
uh just just the way that that varying degrees of entanglement can be thought about and whether that
maybe ties into how the hilbert space
is is thought about at the same time
yeah this this assumption or this question touches on uh why we do everything in the paper from the
point of view of a bipartite decomposition
so we always we always decompose into a system and its environment in the paper
and there are two reasons for that
one is to keep it simple
and the other one's to enforce the marcold blanket condition
so
uh it's entirely commonplace to do physics in an open systems framework where we talk about
two systems we can call them alice and bob again that are embedded in a common environment
and in that case whenever you have a tripartite or greater some sort of multi-particle kind of
decomposition of the state space you can talk about degrees of entanglement
between different systems and you can you know cut up the state space any way you want to and
ask about the entanglement entropy of some component of it um and you and you get these ideas of of partial
or they call it non-monogamous entanglement
um and that's all well and good it's it's mathematically complicated it's conceptually complicated
but in in a sense it deeply violates the marcold blanket condition
um because in point of fact each of us is an observer
and uh our goal is to to say what does the world look like to an observer
and from alice's point of view uh bob is a decomposition of her markov blanket
right alice has to actively disambiguate uh
her incoming signals into signals that she attributes to bob as an entity
and signals that she attributes to the rest of the environment as an entity
so that's an active cognitive process on alice's part
uh that's what the markov blanket condition
that's how the markov blanket condition in a sense forces us to think
uh so uh the markov blanket condition itself uh makes us take this idea of bipartite decomposition
seriously and again you can think of this in terms of of implicit assumptions about resources
uh if you think in open systems terms and so you think of alice and bob as as
ontic entities that are that are separate from each other by a priori assumption
and separate from their environments by a priori assumption
then you systematically underestimate the amount of cognition that alice and bob have to be doing
and so you systematically underestimate their energy consumption
and so you systematically underestimate their their uncontrolled effect on the environment i.e.
generation of waste heat acquisition of free energy resources and all of that
so it's not just a philosophical difference it's a difference that leads you to make uh genuinely
alternate predictions about things like metabolic load so uh that's why we do things in this bipartite
framework to respect the markov blanket condition and to uh keep our assumptions about energy flow explicit
can we take that to the latter sections in the paper about biological cognition
what are the implications for this for biological systems
what are the implications for this for biological systems
yeah carl
well um
just to pursue that sort of thought experiment where you're trying to now
say you wanted to use active inference to simulate alice and bob observing a pair of electrons
and remembering that the pair of electrons are one thing so you now got a tripartite
uh with three markov blankets in play um and many of the issues for example um the super determinism that allows
some assumptions about the qrf alignments between bob and alice um uh to be in play um and also the discussion
of how um alice has to have uh has to contextualize sensations from bob um under a belief or an internal model that bob is indeed another markov blanket and possibly a markov blanket very much like alice
alice what you are saying is that two of these particles bob and alice have aligned
have aligned qrs that could have been aligned historically uh under the super which i never heard of before but i like the word at the super determinism
and that may be a prerequisite to understand the experiments that we were taken through uh previously when looking at the third markov blanket which would be the uh the electron um uh or the two electrons but for simplicity
um so um that from a biological perspective tells you something quite um uh quite interesting in the sense that um it starts to get to um the
if it's the case that you can basically carve up a bunch of states not in a bipartite way but in a multi-partite way and that carving is by inserting
um markov blankets um markov blankets um to define the partition and that every um if you like subset of that space now becomes internal to its own markov blanket so there are now no external states all we have in play now
are a set of internal states each equipped with their holographic screen or uh markov blanket states that are exchanging with other internal states then there's some really interesting questions about how that system will
evolve um you know evolve um you know from the point of view of the discussion we've been having
it's going to evolve and under the principle of unitarity to entanglement so it's going to from from a
classical perspective um if you allow me it's going to tend to a a a state of um uh generalized synchronization
where everything collapses onto the same synchronization manifold and everything is indistinguishable there's
perfect mutual predictability there's a communication of an elemental and fundamental saw so everything has basically
everything is singing from exactly the same hymn sheet that's the natural way of things the free energy principle is just one way of describing that natural tendency
what would that look like cognitively well it would look as if the markov blankets were trying to learn about each other and to the extent that they can act on each other
they're going to try and solicit um the kinds of outcomes that would enable them to learn about each other
so we're now going to get a situation that is driven by the imperative towards mutual predictability and entanglement
um that's an illusion uh we you know all that is actually happening is that the system is becoming entangled but it will look as if
all of these separate um um markov blankets or um sets of internal states are aligning in a mutually compatible way their qrs so they can exchange and predict each other
and if there's if you like an odd man out namely the pair of electrons um then that you know then there will be an asymmetry and there will be greater degrees of entanglement
um you know for at multiple levels for example um if they're both observing a thermostat then the thermostat's not going to be very good at learning how to align its qrs with bob and alice but you know they're all going to make the best job of it um ultimately of course with good cultural eco niche construction they'll they'll build better thermostats and become little robots and then they can all live happily and communicate
and communicate so i think that sort of the cognitive thing here comes again back to learning to live in your world as an apparent expression of the um the um inevitable progression to entanglement whereby we try to learn about each other
under the plausible hypothesis that you are like me it's not necessarily true but it's one hypothesis you can bring bring to the table you never know whether it's true or not um
but that's certainly one hypothesis that would work very nicely for alice and bob if they can develop a common language so this notion of aligning qrs between two blanketed systems particles
um that are sufficiently similar um then just simply translates into um learning uh to share the same narrative to share the same language uh in order to render um everything
mutually predictable so i know exactly what you're going to say next and you know exactly what i'm going to say next and we come now to this asymptotic limit of zero prediction error zero free energy and complete entanglement
and that would be the you're the object we'd have no ukraines or brexits or or anything if we could get there um but that would be the you know the direction of travel from a biological perspective
um just just to there are simulations of this from a purely classical uh perspective um stuff and what you'd normally do um is start off with um two systems um that uh think they have um strange attractors usually a lorenzi tractor
so they think that their dynamics um are generated by their act that their autonomous or their active states um create stuff out there that um has um uh a chaotic aspect and i i i say that explicitly just because this sort of the notion of free will and choice in the classical domain
usually reduces to sensitivity to initial conditions which strikes me as a homolog of the super determinism game
can you go right back to the beginning and um explain everything um uh and in sort of classical dynamical systems there are certain situations where you can't because you get a sensitivity to initial conditions um so that would leave space or uh free will and choice at that certainly at uh uh um you know at one level but sorry i digress the um so what you do is
you basically put sort of two chaotic systems with sensitivity to initial conditions together um but they're not identical in the first instance but if they can exchange sensory and active states or they can exchange across a shared holographic screen so we're now back to the bipartite situation then they will naturally
if you think about they can't do anything else um they will naturally come to a state of entanglement i.e in if um uh generalized synchrony and if you allow the parameters of the equations of motion that underwrite these chaotic dynamic dynamics to also maximize mutual predictability or minimize free energy then they will actually come to show an identical synchronization because they will learn to become like each other just like mike's robots
um but in this instance they're learning about the other person simply to make things predictable so then you will have a shared narrative and in principle um you should be able to evince a kind of language i i mentioned that because i know chris wanted to talk about language we wanted to talk about you know quantum physics is just basically a description of communication and language uh i don't think we're gonna have time to do that but i thought i'd slip that in anyway
i think it's interesting from this perspective that we
um we always divide our environment into entities like us and then at least one entity that's radically unlike us which we call the shared environment or the the open environment or the general environment or something like that and um so we have this sense of a
uh social grouping of similar entities uh social grouping of similar entities uh that are commonly exposed to this vastly dissimilar entity uh with which we don't share a common language uh and we're not very good at predicting uh and so on and so we always have this kind of open systems point of view
um and uh one of the um one of the um one of the um one of the um one of the um
this vastly different system with which we don't share a common language is it's our free energy source and sink
so it's where we put our waste heat and it's it's where we get our free energy for doing computation
um so i i think it's interesting to think of uh this situation of uh kind of local
synchrony or local entanglement or a local language community uh local shared predictability
uh embedded in uh this unpredictable uh chaotic uh and in a sense in principle chaotic because it's the waste heat dump
right uh we we've assumed a priori that we can't understand it because it's where we're putting
uh all of our the thermodynamic entropy that we're creating uh we we've we've put ourselves in a conceptual
bind almost automatically by being systems that that have to generate this entropy and put it somewhere
so i like this this classical to quantum correspondence very much and i i think it works very nicely
awesome mike
yeah um i want to i want to float an idea which is literally just a few days old so it may be
uh complete nonsense but i'll float it anyway because i think it's uh i think it's it's it's
relevant and i've been thinking about it this way it occurs to me that um you know this this binary
distinction between uh there are agents some of them like me some of them different maybe competitors
whatever but there there are some agents that i can communicate with or can i receive influence or
signals from and then and then there's this environment which is you know something that we
assume or i mean some some cultures of course don't assume that but but we can assume that it has very
low or zero agency meaning that it just is this sort of dumb on purposeless universe and it's on us to
sort of figure out what it's doing right so it occurs to me that that that distinction maybe shouldn't
be binary and maybe what we want to be thinking about is as an agent when you are receiving something
uh from from what you think is the outside you might want to estimate uh what is the agency on the other
end for and and you might want to do this for the following reason right and i started thinking about
this by imagining what it would be like to be in an internal partition or a chunk of a giant neural net
being trained you know you you live if if that's you you live in a very mindful universe you know you
could catch on to the fact that you know what i'm being i'm being trained for something you know the
world like there are bigger patterns here and of course it moves in inscrutable ways and everything
because i can't you know i can't sort of for i can't understand the whole pattern of what's going on
but i can definitely tell that it's rewarding me and punishing me for specific behaviors right and of
course some people do feel that way about the universe and at large that there are patterns that
uh that are not just you know not quote unquote just physics and so so the reason the reason i i
think and and this extends to you know we have supervised learning and unsupervised learning and
again we think of those as kind of binary things right is there some sort of intelligence on the
other end telling you what's right and wrong or is it just on you to abstract patterns from the
environment and the reason i think we this matters is that if if uh if if you are uh trying to learn from
the environment meaning there's only one agent involved there's right there's that's you there's
one agent and then there's this sort of unthinking universe around you then you are pretty much
guaranteed that whatever uh whatever you can manage to infer to it will be to your utility it's on you
to figure out you to learn whatever you can if there's another agent on the other side and you are
being trained right then uh what are the odds that that agent has your best interests at heart i mean
maybe but maybe not and so if this is some sort of supervised learning you have to ask yourself
what is it that i'm being trained and is it really what i what i want right there's there's another
there's it's kind of a whole thing that you can imagine evolutionarily that may be to avoid uh being
hijacked by um by by by by parasites by by you know competitors by whoever you don't really want to be
trainable too much you you want to learn but you don't really want to be trained and so maybe the
idea then is that uh what if what if and this is okay this is where you know i really haven't haven't
talked to anybody about this yet so this is again could be a very immature stuff but but what if uh
something like back propagation or whatever what if that literally hurts what if as a as a right as an early
creature having some sort of error function forced back through your channels as opposed to whatever
you were trying to generate yourself what if that's evolutionarily designed to be unpleasant and what if
uh what you're trying to do is avoid that happening you don't want to be trained you want to uh learn on
your own terms and you could sort of imagine the different layers of a feed forward artificial neural
network where the like the initial input layer that that sort of creature gets to see the world
quote unquote as it is it gets the raw inputs the next layer and certainly the layers past that you
know the ones on the right that are abstracting they're getting all kinds of propaganda filtered to
them by the early layers you know they don't get to see the real inputs they get to see whatever the
pre the prior layers think they should be seeing and and so maybe if you don't have a flat network like
this but maybe what you have is a you know more biologically you have a kind of a nested um
uh multi-scale kind of system maybe there's some sort of uh incentive for the middle layers to try to
sort of crawl leftward so that they have more raw access to the real world and not be trapped uh being
being fed by these other agents right so again you know this is all very qualitative stuff but you get
the idea that's that's kind of what uh what what what i was thinking about nice the in and then
mike if you want to chat about this this is what i was doing for about 10 years unleashing and getting
out of the lab and getting past the toy model so perhaps we should chat about this for a bit can i just
just a couple of things uh chris first of all thank you for uh i feel like i've come away with a munich
stein volume worth of of coolness for the last two weeks just listening to you explain these really
com well complicated things to me uh in ways that i can actually understand um one of the things that
i'm i'm still kind of curious about is once we let things out of the lab and we keep them in that
variability retained space and we're and we don't want to be in conflict with sort of the basic rules of
of what quantum information tells us i want to kind of go back for one second to what stephen was
kind of closing the 40.1 with and that is what do we do when we look at things in in that sort of
relational realm that a lot of um indulge indigenous cultures sort of take up and try to
find themselves within and i'm kind of gleaning to this idea that there's there's a sort of a
subject matter generalist that leads to a prediction matter expert down the road and i i talked to
carl i have it was my question to carl back in june when he was talking to us in the active inference
lab and so without getting into any kind of conflict with the quantum aspects of this um what what what
do we take out with with us when we go on a bike ride with with chris fields that's that's quantum
related that isn't in conflict with everything we've talked about today but gives us a better
confidence around the things that we might encounter and predict
what do you take on your bike chris yeah what's in your quiver yeah yeah good question um
uh
you know
once again these these theoretical frameworks
are languages
and they
their role is to shape our concepts or their they are ways of shaping our concepts
and um
i i think the the fundamental
kind of lesson of quantum theory for us is to
not take the boundaries we see
uh as literally as we're encouraged to do in
the classical world view i'll try to distinguish the classical world view from classical physics
physics
because classical physics by itself
uh again going back to someone like alplos
uh
is
a physics of of
atoms
which are which are you know sort of elemental
uh
it's not a physics of bounded macroscopic objects the boundaries even in classical physics are sort of arbitrary
and i i think that's what quantum theory is trying to tell us to
is trying to tell us that these these are boundaries that we draw on our blankets
and i think this is in a sense what
uh thinking about the fep is trying to tell us that
uh that we have to take this notion that we're
blanketed entities seriously
when we think about what we're interacting with
which is you know everything but us
is









































































quantum questions touching on the work of like ken wilbur and i think it's just so powerful about um
does someone have the whole world in their hands is that a good person is it a bad person or thing
what kind of thing is that who's on the other side of this video call who's on the other side
of that other side what's the bigger picture and it really brings it home that no it's not just about
electrons this is something that is across scales and systems so really just wanted to appreciate the
paper and hope that we continue on this line of development and i'll pass to steven
uh thanks daniel yeah i was going to tie this a little bit some of the threads with um
this challenge of having this false sense of certainty in our culture and it does feel
uncomfortable to be trained um but we do it in the west because we're confident that we've
got this expert knowledge but then we suddenly find out we don't know as much as we do know
or we think we know so that may be why bottom-up sort of organic indigenous kind of ways of being or
ways of sensing can feel more holistic so i think there might be something quite powerful in that so
i like that cred and i think that ties together with um the challenges in practice when we try to to
train up communities especially if we're working say if i've worked in rural africa
and communities there that if they don't feel connected to the the colonizing narrative it feels
very oppressive so there's you know there's a lot of good points there around where is their coherence
where there's decoherence and also where's their certainty and where there's uncertainty so thanks
this is really helpful and um i'll pass it over to blue
well i've said enough i think i'd like to hear from mike or carl or chris about where where you're
going or what you're taking away or or what what are your final thoughts about the discussion we've had
over the last couple of weeks
i mean i guess i guess the only thing i'll say is that uh to to me i i really like um this idea that
it it turns on its head this this notion that that you have this this this massive amount of uh mindless
stuff and then somehow you know a little bit of mind shows up at the end that that that kind of turns
that upside down and and if that's the case then it becomes then the scaling problem is is really really
interesting right is how how you scale you know how how biology manages to scale these things so
that they become synergistic synergistic and bigger and bigger as opposed to you know just merely a
bigger pile of rocks than than the previous pile of rocks and so that uh right so so those those
mechanisms and in particular in biology and and so you know i look at it from from cells getting
together to be organisms and solving problems in the anatomical space but but i think there we actually
have uh some pretty good um alternative although very very very similar in many ways isomorphic but
alternative stories to what happens in neuroscience to try to understand how that scaling actually works
so i'm super i'm just super super excited about that and also the role of the observer and all of this
and the idea that all of this is based on various observers observing each other and i think that makes
it it makes for a lot of progress and and fewer pseudo problems when you when you look at it that way
israeli.com
carl or chris any final thoughts
well i'll i'll just thank you guys again for putting this together i thought this was a
fascinating conversation and um you know if i'll could throw one more thing into it i i i think
conversations like this are our evidence for the kind of disciplinary
siloization that's been forced onto us by academic tradition being an artifact
and not necessarily being all that useful
thanks so much Carl we're going to leave you with the final word
ah good well it has to be a thank you doesn't it um for you lot for putting this together and and
for the brilliant uh didactic and also challenging didactic uh unpacking of some really um challenging
but I think revealing issues and also the brilliant questions um my final word will be future pointing
I'm um just taking up um taking up the sleeves of Chris's you know having unsiloed conversations
is useful just think thinking about Mike having the balls to come up with his brand new hypothesis
that's two years old it's two days of my apologies so I thought it was really interesting just a nice
example of putting things into this kind of discussion which we're all going to go and
think about so my immediate thought was um how on earth does the second layer in a variation auto
encoder or something doing back prop act um and of course it can act if it if it's a recurrent neural
network and it can select which of the um the lowest level neurons or hidden there sorry not a non-hidden
layer um units uh to listen to um and of course we come back again exactly to attention and selecting
those sources of precise information um where you've got a kind of internal action so an interesting and
silly thought but just a nice example of how talking together can excite interesting and potentially useful
or possibly silly silly thoughts but again thank you wonderful I had a great time observing
all of you um and hope to get to do more of it in the future yep we can have a dot three any time consider
40 um in the uh intermeasurement interval while our igus is digesting and uh talk to you all soon
thanks again thanks very much everyone thank you bye bye bye that's great
you
you
